2. Insurance Agents are usually individuals but some can be corporate agents 
too. Unlike brokers, agents cannot place insurance with any insurance 
company but only with the company for which they have been granted an 
agency. As per current regulations, an agent can act only on behalf of one 
general insurance company and one life insurance company one health 
insurer and one of each of the mono line insurers. at the most. They too are 
remunerated by insurance companies by way of insurance commission. 

3. Third Party Administrators are a new type of service providers who came 
into business since 2001. They are not authorized to sell insurance but 
provide administrative services to insurance companies. Once a health 
insurance policy is sold, the details of the insured persons are shared with a 
appointed TPA who then prepares the data base and issues health cards to 
the insured persons. Such health cards enable the insured person to avail 
cashless medical facilities (treatment without having to pay cash 
immediately) at hospitals and clinics. Even if the insured person does not 
use cashless facility, he can pay the bills and seek reimbursement from the 
appointed TPA. TPAs are funded by the insurance companies for their 
respective claims and are remunerated by them by way of fees which are a 
percentage of the premium.
315 
4. Insurance Web Aggregators are one of the newest types of service 
providers to be governed by IRDAI regulations. Through their web site 
and/or telemarketing, they can solicit insurance business through distance 
marketing without coming face to face with the prospect and generate 
leads of interested prospects to insurers with whom they have an 
agreement. They also display products of such insurance companies for 
comparison. They may also seek IRDAI authorization to perform 
telemarketing and outsourcing functions for the insurers such as premium 
collection through online portal, sending premium reminders and also 
various types of policy related services. They are remunerated by insurance 
companies based on the leads converted to business, display of insurance 
products as well as the outsourcing services performed by them. 

5. Insurance Marketing Firms are the latest types of intermediaries to be 
governed by IRDAI. They can perform the following activities by employing 
individuals licensed to market, distribute and service such products: 

Insurance Selling Activities: To sell by engaging Insurance Sales Persons 
(ISP) insurance products of two Life, two General and two Health Insurance 
companies at any point of time, under intimation to the Authority. In 
respect of general insurance, the IMF is allowed to solicit or procure only 
retail lines of insurance products as given in the file & use guidelines 
namely motor, health, personal accident, householders, shopkeepers and 
such other insurance products approved by the Authority from time to time. 
Any change in the engagement with the insurance companies can be done 
only with the prior approval of the Authority and with suitable 
arrangements for servicing existing policyholders. 

Insurance Servicing Activities: These servicing activities shall be only for 
those insurance companies with whom they have an agreement for 
soliciting or procuring insurance products and are enumerated below: 
a. undertaking back office activities of insurers as allowed in the Guidelines 
on Outsourcing Activities by Insurance Companies issued by the 
Authority; 
b. becoming approved person of Insurance Repositories; 
c. undertaking survey and loss assessment work by employing on their rolls 
licensed surveyor & loss assessors; 
d. any other insurance related activity permitted by the Authority from 
time to time. 

Financial Products Distribution: To distribute by engaging Financial Service 
Executives (FSE) who are individuals licensed to market, distribute and 
service such other financial products namely: 
a. mutual funds of mutual fund companies regulated by SEBI; 
b. pension products regulated by PFRDA; 
c. other financial products distributed by SEBI licensed Investment 
Advisors; 
d. banking/ financial products of banks/ NBFC regulated by RBI; 
e. non-insurance products offered by Department of Posts, Government of 
India;
316 
f. any other financial product or activity permitted by the Authority from 
time to time. 

D. OTHERS IMPORTANT ORGANIZATIONS 

There are a few more entities which form part of the health insurance market 
and these include: 

1. Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority of India (IRDAI) which is 
the Insurance regulator formed by an Act of Parliament which regulates all 
business and players in the insurance market. It came into being in 2000 and 
is entrusted with the task of not only regulating but also developing 
insurance business. 

2. General Insurance and Life Insurance Councils, who also make 
recommendations to IRDAI for governing their respective life or general 
insurance business. 

3. Insurance Information Bureau of India was promoted in year 2009 by IRDA 
and is a registered society with a governing council of 20 members mostly 
from the insurance sector. It collects analyses and creates various sector-
level reports for the insurance sector to enable data-based and scientific 
decision making including pricing and framing of business strategies. It also 
provides key inputs to the Regulator and the Government to assist them in 
policymaking. The Bureau has generated many reports, both periodic and 
one-time, for the benefit of the industry. 

IIB handles the Central Index Server which acts as a nodal point between 
different Insurance Repositories and helps in de-duplication of demat 
accounts at the stage of creation of a new account. The Central Index Server 
also acts as an exchange for transmission/routing of information pertaining 
to transactions on each policy between an insurer and the insurance 
repository. 

IIB has already launched its hospital unique ID master programme by enlisting 
the hospitals in 'the preferred provider network' serving the health insurance 
sector. 

The latest initiative of IIB would be maintaining a health insurance grid 
connecting TPAs, insurers and hospitals. The aim of the initiative is to help 
the health insurance sector to come out with a system of insurance claims 
management with transparency in treatment costs and efficient pricing of 
health insurance products. 

4. Educational institutions such as Insurance Institute of India and National 
Insurance Academy which provide a wide variety of insurance and 
management related training and a host of private training institutes which 
provide training to would-be agents
317 
5. Medical Practitioners also assist insurance companies and TPAs in assessing 
health insurance risks of prospective clients during acceptance of risks and 
also advise insurance companies in case of difficult claims. 

6. Legal entities such as the Insurance Ombudsman, Consumer courts as well as 
civil courts also play a role in the health insurance market when it comes to 
redressal of consumer grievances.
318 
Summary 

a) Insurance in some form or other existed many centuries ago but its modern 
form is only a few centuries old. Insurance in India has passed through many 
stages with government regulation. 

b) Health of its citizens being very important, governments play a major role in 
creating a suitable healthcare system. 

c) Level of healthcare provided depends on many factors relating to a 
country‟s population. 

d) The three type of healthcare are primary, secondary and tertiary depending 
on the level of medical attention required. Cost of healthcare rises with 
each level with tertiary care being the costliest. 

e) India has its own peculiar challenges such as population growth and 
urbanization which require proper healthcare. 

f) The government was also the first to come up with schemes for health 
insurance followed later by commercial insurance by private insurance 
companies. 

g) The health insurance market is made up of many players some providing the 
infrastructure, with others providing insurance services, intermediaries such 
as brokers, agents and third party administrators servicing health insurance 
business and also other regulatory, educational as well as legal entities 
playing their role. 

Key terms 

a) Healthcare 
b) Commercial insurance 
c) Nationalization 
d) Primary, Secondary and Tertiary Healthcare 
e) Mediclaim 
f) Broker 
g) Agent 
h) Third Party Administrator 
i) IRDAI 
j) Ombudsman
319 
CHAPTER 18 

INSURANCE DOCUMENTATION 
Chapter Introduction 

In the insurance industry, we deal with a large number of forms, documents etc. 
This chapter takes us through the various documents and their importance in an 
insurance contract. It also gives an insight to the exact nature of each form, how 
to fill it and the reasons for calling specific information. 

Learning Outcomes 

A. Proposal forms 
B. Acceptance of the proposal (underwriting) 
C. Prospectus 
D. Premium receipt 
E. Policy Document 
F. Conditions and Warranties 
G. Endorsements 
H. Interpretation of policies 
I. Renewal notice 
J. Anti-Money Laundering and „Know Your Customer Guidelines 

After studying this chapter, you should be able to: 

a) Explain the contents of proposal form. 
b) Describe the importance of Prospectus 
c) Explain the premium receipt and Sec 64VB of Insurance Act, 1938 
d) Explain terms and wordings in insurance policy document. 
e) Discuss policy conditions, warranties and endorsement. 
f) Appreciate why endorsements are issued. 
g) Understand how policy wordings are seen in courts of law. 
h) Appreciate why renewal notices are issued. 
i) Know what Money Laundering is and what an agent needs to do regarding 
Know Your Customer guidelines.
320 
A. Proposal forms 

As stated earlier, insurance is a contract which is reduced in writing to a policy. 
Insurance documentation is not limited to issuance of policies. As there are many 
intermediaries like brokers and agents who operate between them, it is possible 
that an insured and his insurer may never meet. 

The insurance company comes to know the customer and his/her insurance needs 
only from the documents that are submitted by the customer. Such documents also 
help the insurer to understand the risk better. Thus, documentation is required for 
the purpose of bringing understanding and clarity between insured and insurer. 
There are certain documents that are customarily used in the insurance business. 

The insurance agent, being the person closest to the customer, has to face the 
customer and clarify all doubts about the documents involved and help him/her in 
filling them up. Agents should understand the purpose of each document involved 
and the importance and relevance of information contained in the documents used 
in insurance. 

1. Proposal forms 

The first stage of documentation is basically the proposal form through which 
the insured informs: 

 who he/she is 
 what kind of insurance he/she needs 
 details of what he/she wants to insure and 
 for what period of time 

Details would mean the monetary value of the subject matter of insurance and 
all material facts connected with the proposed insurance. 

a) 
Risk assessment by insurer 

i. Proposal form is to be filled in by the proposer for furnishing all 
material information required by the insurer in respect of a risk, in order 
to enable the insurer to decide: 

 whether to accept or refuse to grant the insurance and 
 in the event of acceptance of the risk, to determine the rates, 
terms and conditions of the cover to be granted 

Proposal form contains information which are useful for the insurance 
company to accept the risk offered for insurance. The principle of utmost 
good faith and the duty of disclosure of material information begin with the 
proposal form for insurance.
321 
The duty of disclosure of material information arises prior to the inception 
of the policy, and continues throughout the period of insurance and even 
after the conclusion of the contract. 

Example 

In the case of Personal Accident policy, If the insured has declared in the 
proposal form that he does not engage in motor sports or horse riding, he has to 
ensure that he does not engage himself in such pursuits throughout the policy 
period. This is a material fact for the insurer who will be accepting the proposal 
based on these facts and pricing the risk accordingly. 

Proposal forms are printed by insurers usually with the insurance company‟s 
name, logo, address and the class / type of insurance / product that it is 
used for. It is customary for insurance companies to add a printed note in 
the proposal form, though there is no standard format or practice in this 
regard. 

Examples 

Some examples of such notes are: 

„Non-disclosure of facts material to the assessment of the risk, providing 
misleading information, fraud or non-co-operation by the insured will nullify the 
cover under the policy issued‟, 

„The company will not be on risk until the proposal has been accepted by the 
Company and full premium paid‟. 

Declaration in the proposal form: Insurance companies usually add a 
declaration at the end of the proposal form to be signed by the proposer. This 
ensures that the insured takes the pain to fill up the form accurately and has 
understood the facts given therein, so that at the time of a claim there is no 
scope for disagreements on account of misrepresentation of facts. 

This also serves to stress the main principle of utmost good faith and disclosure 
of all material facts on the part of the insured. 

The declaration converts the common law principle of utmost good faith to a 
contractual duty of utmost good faith.
322 

Standard form of declaration 

The IRDAI has specified the format of the standard declaration in the health 
insurance proposal as under: 

1. I/We hereby declare, on my behalf and on behalf of all persons proposed 
to be insured, that the above statements, answers and/or particulars 
given by me are true and complete in all respects to the best of my 
knowledge and that I/We am/are authorized to propose on behalf of 
these other persons. 

2. I understand that the information provided by me will form the basis of 
the insurance policy, is subject to the Board approved underwriting 
policy of the insurance company and that the policy will come into force 
only after full receipt of the premium chargeable. 

3. I/We further declare that I/we will notify in writing any change 
occurring in the occupation or general health of the life to be 
insured/proposer after the proposal has been submitted but before 
communication of the risk acceptance by the company. 

4. I/We declare and consent to the company seeking medical information 
from any doctor or from a hospital who at any time has attended on the 
life to be insured/proposer or from any past or present employer 
concerning anything which affects the physical or mental health of the 
life to be assured/proposer and seeking information from any insurance 
company to which an application for insurance on the life to be 
assured/proposer has been made for the purpose of underwriting the 
proposal and/or claim settlement. 

5. I/We authorize the company to share information pertaining to my 
proposal including the medical records for the sole purpose of proposal 
underwriting and/or claims settlement and with any Governmental 
and/or Regulatory authority. 

b) Nature of questions in a proposal form 

The number and nature of questions in a proposal form vary according to the 
class of insurance concerned. 

In personal lines like health, personal accident and travel insurance, 
proposal forms are designed to get information about the proposer‟s health, 
way of life and habits, pre-existing health conditions, medical history, 
hereditary traits, past insurance experience etc.
323 
Elements of a proposal 

i. Proposer‘s name in full 

The proposer should be able to identify herself unambiguously. It is 
important for the insurer to know with whom the contract has been entered, 
so that the benefits under the policy would be received only by the insured. 
Establishing identity is important even in cases where someone else may 
have acquired an interest in the risk insured (like legal heirs in case of death) 
and have to make a claim. 

ii. Proposer‘s address and contact details 

The reasons stated above are applicable for collecting the proposer‟s address 
and contact details as well. 

iii. Proposer‘s profession, occupation or business 

In some cases like health and personal accident insurance, the proposer‟s 
profession, occupation or business are of importance as they could have a 
material bearing on the risk. 

Example 

A delivery man of a fast-food restaurant, who has to frequently travel on motor 
bikes at a high speed to deliver food to his customers, may be more exposed to 
accidents than the accountant of the same restaurant. 

iv. Details and identity of the subject matter of insurance 

The proposer is required to clearly state the subject matter that is proposed 
for insurance. 

Example 

The proposer is required to state if it is: 

i. An overseas travel (by whom, when, to which country, for what purpose) 
or 
ii. A person‟s health (with person‟s name, address and identification) etc. 
depending on the case 

v. Sum insured indicates limit of liability of the insurer under the policy and 
has to be indicated in all proposal forms.
324 
Example 

In case of health insurance, it could be the cost of hospital treatment, while for 
personal accident insurance this could be a fixed amount for loss of life, loss of 
a limb, or loss of sight due to an accident. 

vi. Previous and present insurance 

The proposer is required to inform the details about his previous insurances 
to the insurer. This is to understand his insurance history. In some markets 
there are systems by which insurers confidentially share data about the 
insured. 

The proposer is also required to state whether any insurer had declined his 
proposal, imposed special conditions, required an increased premium at 
renewal or refused to renew or cancelled the policy. 

Details of current insurance with any other insurer including the names of 
the insurers are also required to be disclosed. Especially in property 
insurance, there is a chance that insured may take policies from different 
insurers and when a loss happens, claim from more than one insurer. This 
information is required to ensure that the principle of contribution is applied 
so that the insured is indemnified and does not gain/profit due to multiple 
insurance policies for the same risk. 

Further, in personal accident insurance an insurer would like to restrict the 
amount of coverage (sum insured) depending on the sum insured under other 
PA policies taken by the same insured. 

vii. Loss experience 

The proposer is asked to declare full details of all losses suffered by him / 
her, whether or not they were insured. This will give the insurer information 
about the subject matter of insurance and how the insured has managed the 
risk in the past. Underwriters can understand the risk better from such 
answers and decide on conducting medical examination or collecting further 
details. 

viii. Declaration by insured 

As the purpose of the proposal form is to provide all material information to 
the insurers, the form includes a declaration by the insured that the 
answers are true and accurate and he agrees that the form shall be the 
basis of the insurance contract. Any wrong answer will give the right to 
insurers to avoid the contract. Other sections common to all proposal forms 
relate to signature, date and in some cases, the agent‘s recommendation.
325 
ix. Where a proposal form is not used, the insurer shall record the information 
obtained orally or in writing, and confirm it within a period of 15 days thereof 
with, the proposer and incorporate the information in its policy. Where the 
insurer later claims that the proposer did not disclose any material information or 
provided misleading or false information on any matter material to the grant 
of a cover, the burden of proving it falls on the insurer. 

It means the insurance company has a duty to record all the information 
received even orally, which the agent has to keep in mind by way of 
follow up. 

Important 

Given below are some of the details of proposal form for a health insurance policy: 

1. The proposal form incorporates a prospectus which gives details of the 
cover, such as coverage, exclusions, provisions etc. The prospectus forms 
part of the proposal form and the proposer has to sign it as having noted its 
contents. 

2. The proposal form collects information relating to the name, address, 
occupation, date of birth, sex, and relationship of each insured person with 
the proposer, average monthly income and income tax PAN No., name and 
address of the Medical Practitioner, his qualifications and registration 
number. Bank details of the insured are also now a days collected to make 
payment of claim money directly through bank transfer. 

3. In addition, there are questions relating to the medical condition of the 
insured person. These detailed questions in the form are based on past 
claims 
experience 
and are to achieve proper underwriting of the risk. 

4. The insured person is required to state full details if he has suffered from 
any of the specified diseases in the form. 

5. Further, the details of any other illness or disease suffered or accident 
sustained are called for as follows: 

a. Nature of illness / injury and treatment 
b. Date of first treatment 
c. Name and address of attending Doctor 
d. Whether fully recovered 

6. The insured person has to state any additional facts which should be 
disclosed to insurers and if he has any knowledge of any positive existence 
or presence of any illness or injury which may require medical attention. 

7. The form also includes questions relating to past insurance and claims 
history and additional present insurance with any other insurer.
326 
8. The special features of the declaration to be signed by the proposer must 
be noted. 

9. The insured person agrees and authorises the insurer to seek medical 
information from any hospital / medical practitioner who has at any time 
attended or may attend concerning any illness which affects his physical or 
mental health. 

10. The insured person confirms that he has read the prospectus forming part of 
the form and is willing to accept the terms and conditions. 

11. The declaration includes the usual warranty regarding the truth of the 
statements and the proposal form as the basis of the contract. 
Medical Questionnaire 

In case of adverse medical history in the proposal form, the insured person has to 
complete a detailed questionnaire relating to diseases such as Diabetes, 
Hypertension, Chest pain or Coronary Insufficiency or Myocardial Infarction. 

These have to be supported by a form completed by a consulting physician. This 
form is scrutinised by company‟s panel doctor, based on whose opinion, 
acceptance, exclusion, etc. are decided. 

IRDAI has stipulated that a copy of the proposal form and the annexures thereof, 
have to be attached to the policy document and the same should be sent to the 
insured for his records. 

2. Role of intermediary 

The intermediary has a responsibility towards both parties i.e. insured and 
insurer 

An agent or a broker, who acts as the intermediary between the insurance 
company and the insured has the responsibility to ensure all material 
information about the risk is provided by the insured to insurer. 

IRDAI regulation provides that intermediary has responsibility towards the 
client. 

Important 

Duty of an intermediary towards prospect (client) 

IRDAI regulation states that “An insurer or its agent or other intermediary shall 
provide all material information in respect of a proposed cover to the prospect 
to enable the prospect to decide on the best cover that would be in his or her 
interest
327 
Where the prospect depends upon the advice of the insurer or his agent or an 
insurance intermediary, such a person must advise the prospect in a fair 
manner. 

Where, for any reason, the proposal and other connected papers are not filled 
by the customer, a certificate may be incorporated at the end of proposal form 
from the customer that the contents of the form and documents have been fully 
explained to him and that he has fully understood the importance of the 
proposed contract.”
328 
B. Acceptance of the proposal (underwriting) 

We have seen that a completed proposal form broadly gives the following 
information: 

 Details of the insured 
 Details of the subject matter 
 Type of cover required 
 Details of the physical features both positive and negative 
 Previous history of insurance and loss 

In the case of a health insurance proposal, the insurer may also refer the 
prospective customer e.g. above 45 years of age to a doctor and/or for medical 
check-up. Based on the information available in the proposal and, where 
medical check-up has been advised, based on the medical report and the 
recommendation of the doctor, the insurer takes the decision. Sometimes, 
where the medical history is not satisfactory, an additional questionnaire to get 
more information is also required to be obtained from the prospective client. 
The insurer then decides about the rate to be applied to the risk factor and 
calculates the premium based on various factors, which is then conveyed to the 
insured. 

Proposals are processed by the insurer with speed and efficiency and all decisions 
thereof are communicated by it in writing within a reasonable period. 

Note on Underwriting and processing of proposals 

As per IRDAI guidelines, the insurer has to process the proposal within 15 days‟ 
time. The agent is expected to keep track of these timelines, follow up 
internally and communicate with the prospect / insured as and when required 
by way of customer service. This entire process of scrutinizing the proposal and 
deciding about acceptance is known as underwriting. 

Test Yourself 2 

As per guidelines, an insurance company has to process an insurance proposal 
within __________. 

I. 7 days 
II. 15 days 
III. 30 days 
IV. 45 days
329 
C. Prospectus 

A Prospectus is a document issued by the insurer or on its behalf to the 
prospective buyers of insurance. It is usually in the form of a brochure or leaflet 
and serves the purpose of introducing a product to such prospective buyers. 
Issue of prospectus is governed by the Insurance Act, 1938 as well as by 
Protection of Policyholders‟ Interest Regulations 2002 and the Health Insurance 
Regulations 2016 of the IRDAI. 

The prospectus of any insurance product should clearly state the scope of 
benefits, the extent of insurance cover and explain in a clear manner the 
warranties, exceptions and conditions of the insurance cover. 

The allowable riders (also called Add-on covers) on the product should also be 
clearly stated with regard to their scope of benefits. Also, the premium related 
to all the riders put together should not exceed 30% of the premium of the main 
product. 

Other important information which a Prospectus should also disclose includes: 

1. Any differences in covers and premium for different age groups or for 
different entry ages 
2. Renewal terms of the policy 
3. Terms of cancellation of policy under certain circumstances 
4. The details of any discounts or loading applicable under different 
circumstances 
5. The possibility of any revision or modification of the terms of the policy 
including the premium 
6. Any incentives to reward policyholders for early entry, continued 
renewals, favourable claims experience etc. with the same insurer 
7. A declaration that all its Health insurance policies are portable which 
means that these policies can be renewed with any other insurer who 
offers similar cover with the same benefits he would have enjoyed had 
he continued with the existing insurer. 

Insurers of Health policies usually publish Prospectuses about their Health 
insurance products. The proposal form in such cases would contain a 
declaration that the customer has read the Prospectus and agrees to it.
330 
D. Premium receipt 

When the premium is paid by the customer to the insurer towards premium, the 
insurer is bound to issue a receipt. A receipt is also to be issued in case any 
premium is paid in advance. 

Definition 

Premium is the consideration or amount paid by the insured to the insurer for 
insuring the subject matter of insurance, under a contract of insurance. 

1. Payment of Premium in Advance (Section 64 VB of Insurance Act, 1938) 

As per Insurance Act, premium is to be paid in advance, before the start of 
the insurance cover. This is an important provision, which ensures that only 
when the premium is received by the insurance company, a valid insurance 
contract can be completed and the risk can be assumed by the insurance 
company. This section is a special feature of non-life insurance industry in 
India. 

Important 

a) Section 64 VB of the Insurance Act-1938 provides that no insurer shall 
assume any risk unless and until the premium is received in advance or is 
guaranteed to be paid or a deposit is made in advance in the prescribed 
manner 

b) Where an insurance agent collects a premium on a policy of insurance on 
behalf of an insurer, he shall deposit with or dispatch by post to the insurer 
the premium so collected in full without deduction of his commission within 
twenty-four hours of the collection excluding bank and postal holidays. 

c) It is also provided that the risk may be assumed only from the date on which 
the premium has been paid in cash or by cheque. 

d) Where the premium is tendered by postal or money order or cheque sent by 
post, the risk may be assumed on the date on which the money order is 
booked or the cheque is posted as the case may be. 

e) Any refund of premium which may become due to an insured on account of 
the cancellation of policy or alteration in its terms and conditions or 
otherwise, shall be paid by the insurer directly to the insured by a crossed 
or order cheque or by postal / money order and a proper receipt shall be 
obtained by the insurer from the insured. It is the practice now a days to 
credit the amount directly to the Insured‟s bank account. Such refund shall 
in no case be credited to the account of the agent.
331 
There are exceptions to the above pre-condition payment of premium, provided 
in the Insurance Rules 58 and 59. One is for payment in instalments in case of 
policies which run for more than 12 months such as life insurance policies. 
Others include payment through a bank guarantee in specified cases where the 
exact premium cannot be ascertained in advance or by debit to a Cash Deposit 
account maintained by the client with the insurer. 

2. Method of payment of premium 

Important 

The premium to be paid by any person proposing to take an insurance policy or 
by the policyholder to an insurer may be made in any one or more of the 
following methods: 

a) Cash 

b) Any recognised banking negotiable instrument such as cheques, demand 
drafts, pay order, banker‟s cheques drawn on any schedule bank in India; 

c) Postal money order; 

d) Credit or debit cards; 

e) Bank guarantee or cash deposit; 

f) Internet; 

g) E-transfer 

h) Direct credits via standing instruction of proposer or the policyholder or 
the life insured through bank transfers; 

i) Any other method or payment as may be approved by the Authority from 
time to time; 

As per IRDAI Regulations, in case the proposer / policyholder opts for premium 
payment through net banking or credit / debit card, the payment must be made 
only through net banking account or credit / debit card issued in the name of 
such proposer / policyholder.
332 

Test Yourself 3 

In case the premium payment is made by cheque, then which of the below 
statement will hold true? 

I. The risk may be assumed on the date on which the cheque is posted 
II. The risk may be assumed on the date on which the cheque is deposited by 
the insurance company 
III. The risk may be assumed on the date on which the cheque is received by the 
insurance company 
IV. The risk may be assumed on the date on which the cheque is issued by the 
proposer
333 

E. Policy Document 

Policy Document 

The policy is a formal document which provides an evidence of the contract of 
insurance. This document has to be stamped in accordance with the provisions of the 
Indian Stamp Act, 1899. 

IRDAI Regulations for protecting policy holder‟s interest specified what 

A health insurance policy should contain: 

a) The name(s) and address(es) of the insured and any other person having 
insurable interest in the subject matter 
b) Full description of the persons or interest insured 
c) The sum insured under the policy person and/or peril wise 
d) Period of insurance 
e) Perils covered and exclusions 
f) Any excess / deductible applicable 
g) Premium payable and where the premium is provisional subject to 
adjustment, the basis of adjustment of premium 
h) Policy terms, conditions and warranties 
i) Action to be taken by the insured upon occurrence of a contingency 
likely to give rise to a claim under the policy 
j) The obligations of the insured in relation to the subject-matter of 
insurance upon occurrence of an event giving rise to a claim and the 
rights of the insurer in the circumstances 
k) Any special conditions 
l) Provision for cancellation of the policy on grounds of misrepresentation, 
fraud, non-disclosure of material facts or non-cooperation of the insured 
m) The address of the insurer to which all communications in respect of the 
policy should be sent 
n) The details of the riders, if any 
o) Details of grievance redressal mechanism and address of ombudsman 

Every insurer has to inform and keep (the insured) informed periodically on the 
requirements to be fulfilled by the insured regarding lodging of a claim arising in 
terms of the policy and the procedures to be followed by him to enable the insurer to 
settle a claim early. 

Test Yourself 4 

No question here
334 

F. Conditions and Warranties 

Here, it is important to explain two important terms used in policy wordings. 
These are called Conditions and Warranties. 
1. Conditions 

A condition is a provision in an insurance contract which forms the basis of the 
agreement. 

EXAMPLES: 

a. One of the standard conditions in most insurance policies states: 
If the claim be in any respect fraudulent, or if any false declaration be 
made or used in support thereof or if any fraudulent means or devices 
are used by the Insured or any one acting on his behalf to obtain any 
benefit under the policy or if the loss or damage be occasioned by the 
wilful act, or with the connivance of the Insured, all benefits under this 
policy shall be forfeited. 

b. The Claim Intimation condition in a Health policy may state: 
Claim must be filed within certain days from date of discharge from the 
Hospital. However, waiver of this Condition may be considered in 
extreme cases of hardship where it is proved to the satisfaction of the 
Company that under the circumstances in which the insured was placed 
it was not possible for him or any other person to give such notice or file 
claim within the prescribed time-limit. 

A breach of condition makes the policy voidable at the option of the 
insurer. 

2. Warranties 

Warranties are used in an insurance contract to limit the liability of the insurer 
under certain circumstances. Insurers also include warranties in a policy to 
reduce the hazard. With a warranty, the insured, undertakes certain obligations 
that need to be complied within a certain period of time and also during the 
policy period and the liability of the insurer depends on the insured‟s 
compliance with these obligations. Warranties play an essential role in 
managing and improving the risk. 

A warranty is a condition expressly stated in the policy which has to be literally 
complied with for validity of the contract. Warranty is not a separate 
document. It is part of the policy document. It is a condition precedent to 
(which operates prior to other terms of) the contract. It must be observed and 
complied with strictly and literally, whether it is material to the risk or not. 

If a warranty is not fulfilled, the policy becomes voidable at the option of the 
insurers even when it is clearly established that the breach has not caused or
335 
contributed to a particular loss. However, in practice, if the breach of warranty 
is of a purely technical nature and does not, in any way, contribute to or 
aggravate the loss, insurers at their discretion may process the claims according 
to norms and guidelines as per company policy. In such case, losses can be 
treated as compromise claims and settled usual for a high percentage of the 
claim but not for 100 percent. 

A personal accident policy may have the following warranty: 

It is warranted that not more than five Insured Persons should travel 
together in the same air conveyance at one time. The warranty may go on to 
say how the claims would be dealt if there is a breach of this warranty. 

Test Yourself 5 

Which of the below statement is correct with regards to a warranty? 

I. A warranty is a condition which is implied without being stated in the policy 
II. A warranty is a condition expressly stated in the policy 
III. A warranty is a condition expressly stated in the policy and communicated 
to the insured separately and not as part of the policy document 
IV. If a warranty is breached, the claim can still be paid if it is not material to 
the risk
336 

G. Endorsements 

It is the practice of insurers to issue policies in a standard form; covering certain 
perils and excluding certain others. 

Definition 

If certain terms and conditions of the policy need to be changed at the time of 
issuance, it is done by setting out the amendments / changes through a document 
called endorsement. 

It is attached to the policy and forms part of it. The policy and the endorsement 
together make up the contract. Endorsements may also be issued during the currency 
of the policy to record changes / amendments. 

Whenever material information changes, the insured has to advice the insurance 
company who will take note of this and incorporate the same as part of the 
insurance contract through the endorsement. 

Endorsements normally required under a policy relate to: 

a) Variations /changes in sum insured 

b) Change of insurable interest by way of taking of a loan and mortgaging the 
policy to a bank. 

c) Extension of insurance to cover additional perils / extension of policy period 

d) Change in risk, e.g. change of destinations in the case of an overseas travel 
policy 

e) Transfer of property to another location 

f) Cancellation of insurance 

g) Change in name or address etc. 

Specimen Endorsements 

For the purpose of illustration, specimen wordings of some endorsements are 
reproduced below: 

Cancellation of policy 

At the request of the insured the insurance by this Policy is hereby declared to 
be cancelled as from <date>. The insurance having been in force for a period 
over nine months, no refund is due to the Insured.
337 

Extension of cover to additional member in the Policy 
At the request of the insured, it is hereby agreed to include Miss. Ratna Mistry, 
daughter of the insured and aged 5 years with a sum insured of Rs. 3 lakhs in the 
policy with effect from <date>. 
In consideration, thereof an additional premium of Rs………………………….. is hereby charged 
to the insured. 

Test Yourself 6 

If certain terms and conditions of the policy need to be modified at the time of 
issuance, it is done by setting out the amendments through __________. 

I. Warranty 
II. Endorsement 
III. Alteration 
IV. Modifications are not possible
338 
H. Interpretation of policies 

Contracts of insurance are expressed in writing and the insurance policy 
wordings are drafted by insurers. These policies have to be interpreted 
according to certain well-defined rules of construction or interpretation which 
have been established by various courts. The most important rule of 
construction is that the intention of the parties must prevail and this 
intention is to be looked for in the policy itself. If the policy is issued in an 
ambiguous manner, it will be interpreted by the courts in favour of the insured 
and against the insurer on the general principle that the policy was drafted by 
the insurer. 

Policy wordings are understood and interpreted as per the following rules: 

a) An express or written condition overrides an implied condition except 
where there is inconsistency in doing so. 

b) In the event of a contradiction in terms between the standard printed 
policy form and the typed or handwritten parts, the typed or 
handwritten part is deemed to express the intention of the parties in the 
particular contract, and their meaning will overrule those of the original 
printed words. 

c) If an endorsement contradicts other parts of the contract the meaning of 
the endorsement will prevail as it is the later document. 

d) Clauses in italics over-ride the ordinary printed wording where they are 
inconsistent. 

e) Clauses printed or typed in the margin of the policy are to be given more 
importance than the wording within the body of the policy. 

f) Clauses attached or pasted to the policy override both marginal clauses 
and the clauses in the body of the policy. 
g) Printed wording is over-ridden by typewritten wording or wording 
impressed by an inked rubber stamp. 

h) Handwriting takes precedence over typed or stamped wording. 

i) Finally, the ordinary rules of grammar and punctuation are applied if 
there is any ambiguity or lack of clarity.
339 
Important 

1. Construction of policies 

An insurance policy is proof of a commercial contract and the general 
rules of construction and interpretation adopted by courts apply to insurance 
contracts as in the case of other contracts. 

The principal rule of construction is that the intention of the parties of the 
contract is most important. That intention must be gathered from the policy 
document itself and the proposal form, clauses, endorsements, warranties etc. 
attached to it and forming a part of the contract. 

2. Meaning of wordings 

The words used are to be construed in their ordinary and popular sense. The 
meaning to be used for words is the meaning that the ordinary man in the 
street would construe. 

On the other hand, words which have a common business or trade meaning 
will be construed with that meaning unless the context of the sentence 
indicates otherwise. Where words are defined by laws, the meaning of that 
definition will be used as per laws. 

Many words used in insurance policies have been the subject of previous legal 
decisions which will be ordinarily applied. Again, the decisions of a higher court 
will be binding on a lower court decision. Technical terms must always be given 
their technical meaning, unless there is an indication to the contrary.
340 

I. Renewal Notice 

Most of the non-life insurance policies are issued on annual basis. 

There is no legal obligation on the part of insurers to advise the insured that his 
policy is due to expire on a particular date. However, as a matter of courtesy 
and healthy business practice, insurers issue a renewal notice in advance of the 
date of expiry, inviting renewal of the policy. The notice shows all the relevant 
particulars of the policy such as sum insured, the annual premium, etc. It is also 
the practice to include a note advising the insured that he should intimate any 
material alterations in the risk. 

The insured‟s attention is also to be invited to the statutory provision that no 
risk can be assumed unless the premium is paid in advance. 

Test Yourself 7 

Which of the below statement is correct with regards to renewal notice? 

I. As per regulations there is a legal obligation on insurers to send a renewal 
notice to insured, 30 days before the expiry of the policy 
II. As per regulations there is a legal obligation on insurers to send a renewal 
notice to insured, 15 days before the expiry of the policy 
III. As per regulations there is a legal obligation on insurers to send a renewal 
notice to insured, 7 days before the expiry of the policy 
IV. As per regulations there is no legal obligation on insurers to send a renewal 
notice to insured before the expiry of the policy
341 
J. Anti-Money Laundering and Know Your Customer Guidelines 

Criminals obtain funds through their illegal activities but seek to pass it on as 
legal money by a process called money laundering. 

Money Laundering is the process by which criminals transfer funds to conceal 
the true origin and ownership of the proceeds of criminal activities. By this 
process, money can lose its criminal identity and appear valid. 

Criminals attempt to use financial services, including banks and insurance, to 
launder their money. They make transactions by using false identities, for 
example, by purchasing some form of insurance and then managing to withdraw 
that money and then disappearing once their purpose is served. 

Steps to prevent such attempts at money laundering have been receiving efforts 
at government levels world-wide, including India. 

The legislation of Prevention of Money Laundering Act was enacted by the 
government in 2002. The Anti-Money Laundering guidelines issued by IRDAI soon 
after have indicated suitable measures to determine the true identity of 
customers requesting for insurance services, reporting of suspicious transactions 
and proper record keeping of cases involving or suspected of involving money 
laundering. 

According to the Know Your Customer guidelines, every customer needs to be 
properly identified by collection of the following documents: 

1. Address verification 
2. Recent photograph 
3. Financial status 
4. Purpose of insurance contract 

The agent is therefore required to collect documents at the time of 
bringing in business to establish the identity of customers: 

1. In case of Individuals - Collect full name, address, contact numbers of 
insured with ID and address proof, PAN number and full bank details for 
NEFT purposes 
2. In case of corporates - collect Certificate of Incorporation, Memorandum 
and Articles of Association, Power of Attorney to transact the business, 
copy of PAN card 
3. In case of Partnership firms - Collect Registration certificate (if 
registered), Partnership deed, Power of Attorney granted to a partner or 
an employee of the firm to transact business on its behalf, Proof of 
identity of such person 
4. In case of Trusts and foundations - similar to that of partnership 

It is important to note here that such information also helps in cross-selling of 
products and is a helpful marketing tool.
342 
Summary