--- 

--- 
b. Date-of-Birth: 

----/----/-------- 

----/----
/-------- 
c. Relationship: 

--- 

--- 
d. Address: 

--- 

--- 
e. Percentage-of-Entitlement: --- 

--- 
9. Existing Insurance: 
Name of Member (Whether Proposer or Covered-Person) 
Details of Premium-Being-Paid (Rupees) 
Name of Member (Whether Proposer or Covered-Person)
215 
Details of Premium-Being-Paid (Rupees) 
a. Life: --- --- --- --- 
b. Health: --- --- --- --- 
c. Unit-Linked Insurance-Product: --- --- --- --- 
d. Pension-Product: --- --- --- --- 
e. Other (Specify): --- --- --- --- 
10. What is the Purpose of Your Opting for this Policy? 
--- 
Section-41 and Section-45, to be Re-Produced by the Insurer. 
Section-B: Specialized or Additional Information. 
1. Physical or Medical Information (Questionnaire), For Each Covered-Person: 
Height: --- 
Weight: --- 
a. Do You Have Any Physical Deformity or Handicap or Congenital Defect 
or Abnormality? Yes / No. 
b. Are You Currently, Undergoing or Have Undergone: Any Tests, 
Investigations; Awaiting the Results of Any Tests, Investigations; or Have 
You Ever Been Advised to Undergo Any Tests, Investigations, or Surgery;
216 
or Been Hospitalized for General Check-Up, Observations, Treatment, or 
Surgery? Yes / No. 
c. Have You Ever Been Treated or Hospitalized for Cancer, Tumour, Cyst, or 
Any Other Growth? Yes / No. 
d. Have You Ever Been Referred to an Oncologist or Cancer-Hospital for 
Any Investigation or Treatment? Yes / No. 
e. Did You Have Any Ailment or Injury or Accident, requiring the Treatment 
or Medication, for More Than a Week? Yes / No. 
f. Have You Ever Been Absent From Work, For More Than a Week, in Last 
2 Years, Due to Any Illness? Yes / No. 
g. Were You or Your Spouse, Ever Tested for: Hepatitis-B or Hepatitis-C, 
Human-Immuno-Deficiency-Virus 
(H.I.V.) 
or 
Acquired-Immune-
Deficiency-Syndrome (A.I.D.S.), or Any Other Sexually-Transmitted-
Disease (S.T.D.)? Yes / No. 
h. Have You Ever Suffered: Chest-Pain, Palpitation, Rheumatic-Fever, Heart-
Murmur, Heart-Attack, Shortness-of-Breath, or Any Other Heart-Related 
Disorder? Yes / No. 
i. Have You Ever Suffered: Symptoms or Ailment, Relating to: Kidney, 
Prostate, Hydrocele, and Urinary System? Yes / No. 
j. Have You Ever Suffered: Gastritis, Stomach or Duodenal Ulcer, Hernia, 
Jaundice, Fistula, Piles, or Any Other Disease or Disorder of the Gastro-
Intestinal System? Yes / No.
217 
k. Have You Ever Suffered: Thyroid Disorder or Any Other Disease or 
Disorder of the Endocrine System? Yes / No. 
l. Have You Undergone or Have Been Recommended to Undergo: 
Angioplasty, By-Pass Surgery, Brain-Surgery, Heart-Valve Surgery, Aorta 
Surgery, or Organ-Transplant? Yes / No. 
m. Have You Ever Suffered: Diabetes or High Blood-Sugar? Yes / No. 
n. Have You Ever Suffered: High Blood-Pressure or Low Blood-Pressure? 
Yes / No. 
o. Have You Ever Suffered: Disorders of Eye, Ear, Nose, Throat, including, 
Defective Sight, Speech, or Hearing, and Discharge from Ears? Yes / No. 
p. Have You Ever Suffered: Ailments, Relating to Liver or Re-Productive 
System? Yes / No. 
q. Have You Ever Suffered: Symptoms or Ailments, Relating to Brain, 
Depression, Mental or Psychiatric Ailment, Multiple-Sclerosis, Nervous 
System, Stroke, Paralysis, Parkinsonism, or Epilepsy? Yes / No. 
r. Have 
You 
Ever 
Suffered: 
Asthma, 
Bronchitis, 
Blood-Spitting, 
Tuberculosis, or Other Respiratory Disorders? Yes / No. 
s. Have You Ever Suffered: Anemia, Blood, or Blood-Related Disorders? 
Yes / No. 
t. Have You Ever Suffered: Musculoskeletal Disorders, such as, Arthritis, 
Recurrent Back-Pain, Slipped-Disc, or Any Other Disorder of Spine, 
Joints, Limbs, or Leprosy? Yes / No.
218 
u. Have You Ever Suffered: Any Other Illness or Impairment, Not Mentioned 
Above? Yes / No. 
2.Details of Female: Proposer or Covered-Person: 
a. Are You Pregnant, Currently? Yes / No. 
b. If Yes, Current Months of Pregnancy: --- 
c. State, the Age of First-Pregnancy: --- 
d. Have You Ever Had Any Abortion, Mis-Carriage, or Ectopic Pregnancy? 
Yes / No. 
e. Have You Undergone Any Gynecological Investigations, Internal Check-
Ups, Breast-Checks, such as, Mammogram or Biopsy? Yes / No. 
f. Have You Ever Consulted a Doctor, Because of an Irregularity at the 
Breast, Vagina, Uterus, Ovary, Fallopian Tubes, Menstruation, Birth-
Delivery, Complications During Pregnancy or Child-Delivery, or a 
Sexually-Transmitted-Disease (S.T.D.)? Yes / No. 
Note: Insurers may ask Appropriate Questions, based on a Particular Product. 
The Above Questions are Illustrative, Only. 
Declaration: 
I / We, hereby declare, on My Behalf and on Behalf of All Persons-Proposed-to-
be-Insured, that, the Above Statements, Answers, and / or Particulars, Given by 
Me, are True and Complete, in All Respects, to the Best of My Knowledge; and 
that, I / We, am / are, authorized to Propose, on Behalf of these Other Persons.
219 
I understand that, the Information, Provided by Me, will form the Basis of the 
Insurance-Policy, and that, the Policy is Subject to the Board-Approved 
Underwriting-Policy of the Insurance-Company, and the Policy will come into 
Force, Only After, Full Receipt of the Premium-Chargeable. 
I / We, further declare that, I / We, will notify, In-Writing, Any Change-Occurring, 
in the Occupation, Financial Health or General Health, of the Life-to-be-Assured 
or Proposer, after the Proposal has been submitted, But Before Communication of 
the Risk-Acceptance, by the Company. 
I / We, declare and consent to the Company, seeking the Medical Information from 
Any Doctor or from Any Hospital, who, At Any Time, has attended on the Life-to-
be-Assured or Proposer, or from Any Past or Present Employer; concerning Any-
Thing, which affects the Physical or Mental Health of the Life-to-be-Assured or 
Proposer, and seeking the Information from Any Insurance-Office, to which, an 
Application for Insurance on the Life-to-be-Assured or Proposer, has been made, 
for the Purpose of Underwriting the Proposal and Claim-Settlement. 
I / We, authorize the Company, to share the Information, pertaining to My 
Proposal, including, the Medical-Records with Any Governmental and / or 
Regulatory Authority. Further, the Information may be shared for the Sole 
Purpose of Proposal-Underwriting and Claim-Settlement. 

Date: ----/----/--------.
220 
--- 
(Signature or Thumb-Impression of Proposer) 
--- 
(Signature of Proposer) 

--- 
(Signature or Thumb-Impression of Life-Assured, if Different from Proposer) 

--- 
(Signature of Life-Assured, if Different from Proposer) 

Section-C: Suitability-Analysis. 
(Highly-Recommended)
221 
1. Affordable Contribution (Current and Projected (Rupees)): 
Year --> 
Last 
Year 
Current 
Year 
5 Years to 10 Years 
10 Years to 15 
Years 
15 Years to 20 Ye
a. Yearly 

b. Monthly 

2. How Do You Project Your Work-Span? 
a. Number of Years 
5 Years 
10 Years 
15 Years
b. Working-Span 

4. Financial Details (Rupees): 
a. Value of Savings and Assets 

b. Details of Liabilities 

c. Expected Inheritance 

5. Identified Insurance-Needs (Rupees): 
a. Life-Assurance (Death or Maturity) 

Desirable Sum-Assured 

b. Health-Insurance 

Desirable Limit-of-Coverage, Per Annum 

c. Savings and Investment-Planning 

3. Income and Expenditure (Current and Projected (Rupees)): 
Year --> 
Last 
Year 
Current 
Year 
5 Years to 10 
Years 
10 Years to 15 
Years 
15 Years to 20 Y
a. Income 

b. Expenditure
222 
Desirable Returns, Per Annum 

d. Pension-Planning 

Desirable Pension, Per Annum 

6. Insurance Plan-Details (Traditional or Unit-Linked-Insurance-Plan or Pension or Heal
a. Plan-Name 
b. Premium-Type 
c. Payment-Mode 
d. Payment-Method 
e. Premium-Term 
f. Coverage-Term 
g. Sum-Assured (Rupees) 
h. Benefits or Riders or Fund-Allocation 

7. Identified Life-Needs (Projections, Per Annum (Rupees)): 
Item 
a. Food, Shelter, Clothing; and Other Living-Expenses, such as, Transportation-Expenses, Utili
b. Education-Expenses 
c. Health-Expenses 
d. Marriage-Expenses 
e. Vacations and Other Travel-Expenses 
f. Other Commitments, such as, Insurance-Premium, Various Contributions, etc. 
Total 

It is declared that, the Above Information has been provided by the Proposer. 
---
223 
(Signature of Agent or Bancassurance or Broker) 
--- 
(Signature or Thumb-Impression of Proposer) 
--- 
(Signature of Proposer) 
--- 
(Signature or Thumb-Impression of Life-Assured, if Different from Proposer) 

--- 
(Signature of Life-Assured, if Different from Proposer) 

Section-D: Product-Proposed. 
(Mandatory)
224 
1. Recommendation: 
1. Life-Stage 
2. Protection-Needs 
3. Appetite for Risk 
4. Policy-Recommended, including, Name of Insurer 
5. Details of Commitment, for the Current Year and Future Years 
6. Whether, All Risk-Elements and Details of Charges to be incurred, and All Other Obligation
7. Why Do You Think that, this Policy is Most-Suited for the Proposer? 
8. 
Whether 
the 
Product-Proposed
i. 
Based 
on 
ii. 
Based 
on 
iii. Based on Agent-Recommendation 
Agent or Bancassurance or Broker’s Certification: 
I / We, hereby certify that, I / We believe that the Product(s), recommended by Me 
/ Us, Above, is / are Suitable for the Proposer, based on the Information, 
Submitted by Him or Her, as Recorded Above. I / We declare that, the Policy-
Recommended has been Fully Explained to the Proposer, including about the 
Terms and Conditions, Exclusions, Premium-Commitments, and Various Charges, 
as Applicable. 
Date: ----/----/--------. 
--- 
(Signature of Agent or Bancassurance or Broker)
225 
--- 
(Signature of Insurer) 

Proposer’s Acknowledgement: 
The Above Recommendation is based on the Information, Provided by Me. I have 
been explained about the Features of the Product, and believe, it would be Suitable 
for Me, based on My Insurance-Needs and Financial Objectives. 
Date: ----/----/--------. 
--- 
(Signature or Thumb-Impression of Proposer) 
--- 
(Signature of Proposer) 
--- 
(Signature or Thumb-Impression of Life-Assured, if Different from Proposer) 

--- 
(Signature of Life-Assured, if Different from Proposer)
226 
2.Where, the Proposer Does Not Accept the Recommendation of the Agent or 
Bancassurance or Broker and Insurer: 
I am not in Agreement with the Recommendation of the Agent or Bancassurance 
or Broker and Insurer. I have opted for the Policy, Named --- (Name of the Policy, 
to be mentioned Here), as per My Wish. 
--- 
(Signature or Thumb-Impression of Proposer) 

--- 
(Signature or Thumb-Impression of Life-Assured, if Different from Proposer) 

Where, Answers to the Questions are filled-in by a Person, Other Than the 
Proposer; or, Where, the Answers or Signature of the Proposer or Life-Assured are 
in Vernacular: 

The Details of the Proposal-Form have been Read-Out and Explained to Me, and I 
have understood the Same. 
---
227 
(Signature or Thumb-Impression of Proposer) 

--- 
(Signature or Thumb-Impression of Life-Assured, if Different from Proposer) 
-*- 

While the IRDAI defined the proposal form, the design and content of the 
form was left open to the discretion of the insurance company. 

11. Agent‘s report 

The agent is the primary underwriter. All material facts and particulars about 
the policyholder, relevant to risk assessment, need to be revealed by the agent 
in his / her report. Matters of health, habits, occupation, income and family 
details need to be mentioned in the report. 

12. Medical examiner‘s report 

In many cases, the life to be insured has to be medically examined by a doctor 
who is empaneled by the insurance company. Details pertaining to physical 
features like height, weight, blood pressure, cardiac status etc. are recorded 
and mentioned by the doctor in his report called the medical examiner‟s report. 

We must note that many proposals are underwritten and accepted for insurance 
without calling for a medical examination. They are known as non–medical 
cases. The medical examiner‟s report is required typically when the proposal 
cannot be considered under non-medical underwriting because the sum 
proposed or the age of the proposed life is high or there are certain 
characteristics which are revealed in the proposal, which call for examination 
and report by a medical examiner. 

The underwriter of the insurance company thereby gets an account of the 
current health position of the life to be insured. 

13. Moral hazard report 

Life insurance is a contract between an individual and an insurance company 
that pays a stated amount of money if the covered person passes away during 
the term of the policy. When you purchase life insurance, you must go through
228 
several underwriting procedures including filling out an application and 
submitting to a physical exam. One factor impacting the risk, which 
underwriters look out for, is termed as moral hazard. 

Definition 

Moral hazard is the likelihood that a client's behaviour might change as a result 
of purchasing a life insurance policy and such a change would increase the 
chance of a loss. 

Example 

John Doe recently purchased a life insurance policy. He then decided to go on a 
skiing expedition at a site which was touted to be one of the most dangerous 
skiing places on earth. In the past he had refused to undertake such 
expeditions. 

Life insurance companies seek to guard against the possibility of individuals 
seeking to make a profit from the purchase of life insurance through actions like 
ending one‟s own life or the life of another. Life insurance underwriters would 
thus look for any factors which might suggest such hazard. 

For this purpose, the company may require that a moral hazard report has to be 
submitted by an official of the insurance company. Before completion of the 
report the reporting official should satisfy himself regarding the identity of the 
proposer. He should meet him preferably at his residence before completing the 
report. The reporting official should make independent enquiries about the life 
to be assureds‟ health and habits, occupation, income, social background and 
financial position etc. 

14. Age Proof 

We have already seen that the risk of mortality in life insurance increases with 
age. Hence age is a factor that insurance companies use to determine the risk 
profile of the life to be insured. Accordingly a premium is charged for each age 
group. Verification of correct age by examination of an appropriate document 
of evidence of age thus assumes significance in life insurance. 

Valid age proofs may be standard or non-standard. 

a) Standard age proofs 

Some documents considered as standard age proofs are: 

i. School or college certificate 
ii. Birth certificate extracted from municipal records 
iii. Passport
229 
iv. PAN card 
v. Service register 
vi. Certificate of baptism 
vii. Certified extract from a family bible if it contains the date of birth 
viii. Identity card in case of defence personnel 
ix. Marriage certificate issued by a Roman Catholic church 

b) Non-standard age proofs 

When standard age proofs like the above are not available, the life insurer 
may allow submission of a non-standard age proof. Some documents 
considered as non-standard age proofs are: 

i. Horoscope 
ii. Ration card 
iii. An affidavit by way of self-declaration 
iv. Certificate from village panchayat 

Diagram 1: Valid age proof 

15. Anti-Money Laundering (AML) 

Definition
230 
Money laundering is the process of bringing illegal money into an economy by 
hiding its illegal origin so that it appears to be legally acquired. The 
Government of India launched the PMLA ,2002 to rein in money-laundering 
activities. 

The Prevention of Money Laundering Act (PMLA), 2002 came into effect from 
2005 to control money laundering activities and to provide for confiscation 
of property derived from money-laundering. It mentions money laundering 
as an offense which is punishable by rigorous imprisonment from three to 
seven years and fine up to Rs. 5 lakhs. 

Each insurer is required to have an AML policy and accordingly file a copy with 
IRDAI. The AML program should include: 

i. 
Internal policies, procedures and controls 

ii. Appointment of a principal compliance officer 

iii. Recruitment and training of agents on AML measures 

iv. Internal audit/control 

16. Know Your Customer (KYC) 
Know your customer is the process used by a business to verify the 
identity of their clients. Banks and insurers are increasingly demanding 
their customers provide detailed information to prevent identity theft, 
financial fraud and money laundering. 

The objective of KYC guidelines is to prevent financial institutions 
from being used by criminal elements for money laundering activities. 

Insurers, hence, need to determine the true identity of their customers. 
Agents should ensure that proposers submit the proposal form along with the 
following as part of the KYC procedure: 

i. Photographs 

ii. Age proof 

iii. Proof of address – driving license, passport, telephone bill, electricity 
bill, bank passbook etc. 

iv. Proof of identity – driving license, passport, voter ID card, PAN card, etc. 

v. Income proof documents in case of high-value transactions 

17. Free-look period
231 
Suppose a person has purchased a new life insurance policy and received the 
policy document and, on examining the same, finds that the terms and 
conditions are not what he/she wanted. 

What can he/she do? 

IRDAI has built into its regulations a consumer-friendly provision that takes care 
of this problem. It has provided for what is termed as a “free look period‟ or as 
“cooling period.” 

During this period, if the policyholder has bought a policy and disagrees to any 
terms and conditions of the policy, he/she can return it and get a refund 
subject to the following conditions: 

i. He/she can exercise this option within 15 days of receiving the policy 
document 

ii. He/she has to communicate to the company in writing 

iii. The premium refund will be adjusted for proportionate risk premium for 
the period on cover, expenses incurred by the insurer on medical 
examination and stamp duty charges 

This free look period is available to life insurance policy holders as a privilege. 
They can exercise this choice during a period of fifteen days from the date of 
receipt of the policy document by the policyholder. 

Test Yourself 1 

During the _________ period, if the policyholder has bought a policy and does 
not want it, he / she can return it and get a refund. 

I. Free evaluation 
II. Free look 
III. Cancellation 
IV. Free trial
232 
Summary 

 
Prospectus is a formal legal document used by insurance companies that 
provides details about the product. 

 
The application document used for making the proposal is commonly known 
as the „proposal form‟. 

 
Matters of health, habits and occupation, income and family details need to 
be mentioned by the agent in the agent‟s report. 

 
Details pertaining to physical features like height, weight, blood pressure, 
cardiac status etc. are recorded and mentioned by the doctor in his/ her 
report called the medical examiner‟s report. 

 
Moral hazard is the likelihood that a client's behaviour might change as a 
result of purchasing a life insurance policy and such a change would increase 
the chance of a loss. 

 
Some documents considered as standard age proofs include school or college 
certificate, birth certificate extracted from municipal records etc. 

 
Each insurer is required to have an AML policy and accordingly file a copy 
with IRDAI. The AML program should include internal policies, procedures 
and controls and appointment of a principal compliance officer. 

 
Insurers need to determine the true identity of their customers. KYC 
documents like address proof, PAN card and photographs etc. need to be 
collected as a part of the KYC procedure. 

Key Terms 

1. Prospectus 
2. Proposal form 
3. Moral hazard 
4. Standard and non-standard age proofs 
5. Anti-money laundering 
6. Know Your Customer (KYC) 
7. Free-look period
233 
Answers to Test Yourself 

Answer 1 

The correct option is II. 

During the free look period, if the policyholder has bought a policy and does not 
want it, he / she can return it and get a refund. 

Self-Examination Questions 

Question 1 

Which of the below is an example of standard age proof? 

I. Ration card 
II. Horoscope 
III. Passport 
IV. Village Panchayat certificate 

Question 2 

Which of the below can be attributed to moral hazard? 

I. Increased risky behaviour following the purchase of insurance 
II. Increased risky behaviour prior to the purchase of insurance 
III. Decreased risky behaviour following the purchase of insurance 
IV. Engaging in criminal acts post being insured 

Question 3 

Which of the below features will be checked in a medical examiner‟s report? 

I. Emotional behaviour of the proposer 
II. Height, weight and blood pressure 
III. Social status 
IV. Truthfulness 

Question 4 

A __________ is a formal legal document used by insurance companies that 
provides details about the product. 

I. Proposal form 
II. Proposal quote 
III. Information docket 
IV. Prospectus
234 
Question 5 

The application document used for making the proposal is commonly known as 
the __________. 

I. Application form 
II. Proposal form 
III. Registration form 
IV. Subscription form 

Question 6 

From the below given age proof documents, identify the one which is classified 
as non-standard by insurance companies. 

I. School certificate 
II. Identity card in case of defence personnel 
III. Ration card 
IV. Certificate of baptism 

Question 7 

Money laundering is the process of bringing _______ money into an economy by 
hiding its _______ origin so that it appears to be legally acquired. 

I. Illegal, illegal 
II. Legal, legal 
III. Illegal, legal 
IV. Legal, illegal 

Question 8 

In case the policyholder is not satisfied with the policy, he / she can return the 
policy within the free-look period i.e. within ________of receiving the policy 
document. 

I. 60 days 
II. 45 days 
III. 30 days 
IV. 15 days 

Question 9 

Which of the below statement is correct with regards to a policy returned by a 
policyholder during the free look period? 

I. The insurance company will refund 100% of the premium 
II. The insurance company will refund 50% of the premium
235 
III. The insurance company will refund the premium after adjusting for 
proportionate risk premium for the period on cover, medical examination 
expenses and stamp duty charges 
IV. The insurance company will forfeit the entire premium 

Question 10 

Which of the below is not a valid address proof? 

I. PAN Card 
II. Voter ID Card 
III. Bank passbook 
IV. Driving licence 

Answers to Self-Examination Questions 

Answer 1 

The correct option is III. 

Passport is an example of a standard age proof. 

Answer 2 

The correct option is I. 

Increased risky behaviour following the purchase of insurance can be attributed 
to moral hazard. 

Answer 3 

The correct option is II. 

Height, weight and blood pressure are among the few items that will be 
checked in a medical examiner‟s report. 

Answer 4 

The correct option is IV. 

A prospectus is a formal legal document used by insurance companies that 
provides details about the product. 

Answer 5 

The correct option is II. 

The application document used for making the proposal is commonly known as 
the proposal form.
236 
Answer 6 

The correct option is III. 

Ration card is classified as a non-standard age proof. 

Answer 7 

The correct option is I. 

Money laundering is the process of bringing illegal money into an economy by 
hiding its illegal origin so that it appears to be legally acquired. 

Answer 8 

The correct option is IV. 

In case the policyholder is not satisfied with the policy, he / she can return the 
policy within the free-look period i.e. within 15 days of receiving the policy 
document. 

Answer 9 

The correct option is III. 

With regards to a policy returned by a policyholder during the free look period, 
the insurance company will refund the premium after adjusting for 
proportionate risk premium for the period on cover, medical examination 
expenses and stamp duty charges. 

Answer 10 

The correct option is II. 

PAN Card is not a valid address proof
237 
CHAPTER 13 

DOCUMENTATION – POLICY CONDITION - I 

Chapter Introduction 

In this chapter we discuss the various documents involved when a proposal 
becomes a life insurance policy. 

Learning Outcomes 

A. Policy stage documentation
238 

A. Policy stage documentation 

1. First Premium Receipt 

An insurance contract commences when the life insurance company issues a 
first premium receipt (FPR). The FPR is the evidence that the policy contract 
has begun. 

The first premium receipt contains the following information: 

i. Name and address of the life assured 
ii. Policy number 
iii. Premium amount paid 
iv. Method and frequency of premium payment 
v. Next due date of premium payment 
vi. Date of commencement of the risk 
vii. Date of final maturity of the policy 
viii. Date of payment of the last premium 
ix. Sum assured 

After the issue of the FPR, the insurance company will issue subsequent 
premium receipts when it receives further premiums from the proposer. These 
receipts are known as renewal premium receipts (RPR). The RPRs act as proof of 
payment in the event of any disputes related to premium payment. 

2. Policy Document 

The policy document is the most important document associated with 
insurance. It is evidence of the contract between the assured and the 
insurance company. It is not the contract itself. If the policy document is lost 
by the policy holder, it does not affect the insurance contract. The insurance 
company will issue a duplicate policy without making any changes to the 
contract. The policy document has to be signed by a competent authority and 
should be stamped according to the Indian Stamp Act. 

The standard policy document typically has three parts: 

a) Policy Schedule 

The policy schedule forms the first part. It is usually found on the face page 
of the policy. The schedules of life insurance contracts would be generally 
similar. They would normally contain the following information:
239 
Diagram 1: Policy document components 

i. Name of the insurance company 

ii. Some specific details for the particular policy like: 

 Policy owner‟s name and address 
 Date of birth and age last birthday 
 Plan and term of policy contract 
 Sum assured 
 Amount of premium 
 Premium paying term 
 Date of commencement, date of maturity and due date of last 
premium 
 Whether policy is with or without profits 
 Name of nominee 
 Mode of premium payment – yearly; half yearly; quarterly; monthly; 
via deduction from salary 
 The policy number – which is the unique identity number of the 
policy contract 

iii. The insurer‟s promise to pay. This forms the heart of the insurance 
contract 

iv. The signature of the authorised signatory and policy stamp 

v. The address of the local Insurance Ombudsman. 

b) Standard Provisions 

The second component of the policy document is made up of standard policy 
provisions, which are normally present in all life insurance contracts, unless 
specifically excluded. Some of these provisions may not be applicable in the 
case of certain kinds of contracts, like term, single premium or non-
participating (in profits) policies. These standard provisions define the rights 
and privileges and other conditions, which are applicable under the 
contract.
240 

c) Specific Policy Provisions 

The third part of the policy document consists of specific policy provisions 
that are specific to the individual policy contract. These may be printed on 
the face of the document or inserted separately in the form of an 
attachment. 

While standard policy provisions, like days of grace or non-forfeiture in case 
of lapse, are often statutorily provided under the contract, specific 
provisions generally are linked to the particular contract between the 
insurer and insured. 

Example 

A clause precluding death due to pregnancy for a lady who is expecting at 
the time of writing the contract 

The detailed provisions are mentioned in chapter 11. 

The Insurance Act, 2015 mandates that every insurer must maintain a record 
with respect to every policy issued by the insurer. Such a record would have the 
following 

 
the name and address of the policy-holder, the date when the policy 
was effected and a record of any transfer, assignment or nomination 
of which the insurer has notice 
 
a record of claims, every claim made together with the date of the 
claim, the name and address of the claimant and the date on which the 
claim was discharged, or; in the case of a claim which is rejected, the 
date of rejection and the grounds thereof; 

This record may be maintained in such form including electronic mode, 
specified in Regulations made under this Act. 

An important provision in the Ordinance is that which stipulates issue of policies 
in electronic [dematerialised or Demat] form. The ordinance provides that 
“Every insurer shall, in respect of all business transacted by him, 
endeavour to issue policies above a specified threshold in terms of sum 
assured and premium in electronic form, in the manner and form to be 
specified by the regulations made under this Act." 

Test Yourself 1 

What does a first premium receipt (FPR) signify? Choose the most appropriate 
option. 

I. Free look period has ended
241 
II. It is evidence that the policy contract has begun 
III. Policy cannot be cancelled now 
IV. Policy has acquired a certain cash value 

Summary 

 
An insurance contract commences when the life insurance company issues a 
first premium receipt (FPR). The FPR is the evidence that the policy 
contract has begun. 

 
The policy document is the most important document associated with 
insurance. It is the evidence of the contract between the assured and the 
insurance company. 

 
The standard policy document typically has three parts which are the policy 
schedule, standard provisions and the policy‟s specific provisions. 

Key Terms 

1. First Premium Receipt (FPR) 
2. Policy document 
3. Policy schedule 
4. Standard provisions 
5. Special Provisions 

Answers to Test Yourself 

Answer 1 

The correct option is II. 

FPR is evidence that policy contract has begun. 

Self-Examination Questions 

Question 1 

Which of the following documents is an evidence of the contract between 
insurer and insured? 

I. Proposal form 
II. Policy document 
III. Prospectus 
IV. Claim form 

Question 2 

If complex language is used to word a certain policy document and it has given 
rise to an ambiguity, how will it generally be construed?
242 

I. In favour of insured 
II. In favour of insurer 
III. The policy will be declared as void and the insurer will be asked to return 
the premium with interest to the insured 
IV. The policy will be declared as void and the insurer will be asked to return 
the premium to the insured without any interest 

Question 3 

Select the option that best describes a policy document. 

I. It is evidence of the insurance contract 
II. It is evidence of the interest expressed by the insured in buying an insurance 
policy from the company 
III. It is evidence of the policy (procedures) followed by an insurance company 
when dealing with channel partners like banks, brokers and other entities 
IV. It is an acknowledgement slip issued by the insurance company on payment 
of the first premium 

Question 4 

Which of the below statement is correct? 

I. The proposal form acceptance is the evidence that the policy contract has 
begun 
II. The acceptance of premium is evidence that the policy has begun 
III. The First Premium Receipt is the evidence that the policy contract has 
begun 
IV. The premium quote is evidence that the policy contract has begun 

Question 5 

For the subsequent premiums received by the insurance company after the first 
premium, the company will issue __________. 

I. Revival premium receipt 
II. Restoration premium receipt 
III. Reinstatement premium receipt 
IV. Renewal premium receipt 

Question 6 

What will happen if the insured person loses the original life insurance policy 
document? 

I. The insurance company will issue a duplicate policy without making any 
changes to the contract 
II. The insurance contract will come to an end 
III. The insurance company will issue a duplicate policy with renewed terms and 
conditions based on the current health declarations of the life insured
243 
IV. The insurance company will issue a duplicate policy without making any 
changes to the contract, but only after a Court order. 

Question 7 

Which of the below statement is correct? 

I. The policy document has to be signed by a competent authority but need 
not be compulsorily stamped according to the Indian Stamp Act. 
II. The policy document has to be signed by a competent authority and should 
be stamped according to the Indian Stamp Act. 
III. The policy document need not be signed by a competent authority but 
should be stamped according to the Indian Stamp Act. 
IV. The policy document neither needs to be signed by a competent authority 
nor it needs to be compulsorily stamped according to the Indian Stamp Act. 

Question 8 

Which of the below forms the first part of a standard insurance policy 
document?