In case, the insured dies or wishes to withdraw from the scheme either 
before the retirement age or after retirement age chosen, then appropriate 
refund of premium would be allowed subject to no claim having occurred 
under the policy. There is a provision of grace period of 7 days for payment 
of premium in the event of satisfactory reason for delay in renewal. 

e) Assignment 

The scheme provides for assignment. 

f) Exclusions 

The policy does not have exclusion of pre-existing diseases, 30 days waiting 
period and first year exclusion for specified diseases as in Mediclaim. Since 
it is a future Mediclaim policy, this is quite logical. 

g) Group insurance variant 

Policy can also be availed of on group basis in which case, facility of group 
discount is available.
367 
H. Combi-products 

Sometimes, products pertaining to life insurance are combined with health 
insurance products. This is a good way of promoting more products in a 
packaged way through two insurers coming together and entering into an 
understanding. 

Health plus Life Combi Products therefore mean products which offer the 
combination of a life insurance cover of a life insurance company and a health 
insurance cover offered by non-life and/or standalone health insurance 
company. 

The products are jointly designed by the two insurers and marketed through the 
distribution channels of both insurers. Obviously, this would entail a tie-up 
between two companies and as per current guidelines, such tie-up is permitted 
only between one life insurer and one non-life insurer at any time. A 
Memorandum of Understanding between such companies must be in place for 
the way marketing, policy servicing and sharing of common expenses will be 
carried out and also policy servicing parameters and transmission of premium. 
Approval of IRDAI for the tie-up may be sought by any one of the insurers. The 
agreement should be of a long term nature and withdrawal from the tie-up will 
not be permitted except under exceptional circumstances and to the 
satisfaction of the IRDAI. 

One of the insurance companies may be mutually agreed to act as a lead insurer 
to play a critical role in facilitating the policy service as a contact point for 
rendering various services as required for combi products. The lead insurer may 
play a major role in facilitating underwriting and policy service. However, the 
claims and commission payouts are handled by the respective insurers 
depending on which section of the policy is affected. 

'Combi Product' filing shall follow the File and Use guidelines issued from time 
to time and individually cleared. The premium components of both risks are to 
be separately identifiable and disclosed to the policyholders at both pre-sale 
stage and post-sale stage and in all documents like policy document, sales 
literature etc. 

The product may be offered both as individual insurance policy and on group 
insurance basis. However in respect of health insurance floater policies, the 
pure term life insurance coverage is allowed on the life of one of the earning 
members of the family who is also the proposer on health insurance policy 
subject to insurable interest and other applicable underwriting norms of 
respective insurers. 

Free Look option is available to the insured and is to be applied to the 'Combi 
Product' as a whole. However, the Health portion of the 'Combi Product' shall 
entitle its renewability at the option of policyholder from the respective Non-
Life/standalone health Insurance Company.
368 
Marketing of Combi Products can be done through Direct marketing channels, 
Brokers and Composite Individual and Corporate Agents common to both 
insurers but not through Bank referral arrangements. However, they cannot be 
intermediaries who are not authorized to market either of the products of 
either of the insurers. 

Specific disclosures have to be made in the proposal and sales literature 
especially features like there are two insurers involved, that each risk is distinct 
from the other, who will settle claims, matters relating to renewability of both 
or only one of the covers at the option of the insured, servicing facilities etc. 

The IT system to service this business must be robust and seamless as it means a 
lot of integration of data between the two insurers and data generation to IRDAI 
as required.
369 
I. Package policies 

Package or umbrella covers give, under a single document, a combination of 
covers. 

For instance in other classes of business, there are covers such as Householder‟s 
Policy, Shopkeeper‟s Policy, Office Package Policy etc. that, under one policy, 
seek to cover various physical assets including buildings, contents etc. Such 
policies may also include certain personal lines or liability covers. 

Examples of package policy in health insurance include combining Critical illness 
cover benefits with indemnity policies and even life insurance policies and 
hospital daily cash benefits with indemnity policies. 

In the case of travel insurance, the policy offered is also a package policy 
covering not only health insurance but also accidental death / disability 
benefits along with Medical expenses due to illness / accident, Loss 
of 
or 
delay in arrival of checked in baggage, Loss of passport and documents, Third 
party liability for property / personal damages, Cancellation of trips and even 
Hijack cover.
370 
J. Micro insurance and health insurance for poorer sections 

Micro-insurance products are specifically designed to aim for the protection of 
low income people from rural and informal sectors. The low income people 
form a sizable part of our population and usually don‟t have any health security 
cover. Therefore, this low value product, with an affordable premium and 
benefit package, is initiated to help these people to cope with and recover from 
common risks. Micro insurance is governed by the IRDA Micro Insurance 
Regulations, 2005. 

These products come with a small premium and typically, the sum insured is 
below Rs.30,000, as required vide the IRDA micro-insurance regulations, 2005. 
Such covers are mostly taken on a group basis by various community 
organizations or non-governmental organizations (NGOs) for their members. The 
IRDA‟s rural and social sector obligations also require that insurers should sell a 
defined proportion of their policies as micro-insurance products, to enable 
wider reach of insurance. 

Two policies particularly created by PSUs to cater to the poorer sections of 
society are described below: 

1. Jan Arogya Bima Policy 

Following are the features of Jan Arogya Bima Policy: 

a. This policy is designed to provide cheap medical insurance to poorer 
sections of the society. 

b. The coverage is along the lines of the individual Mediclaim policy. 
Cumulative bonus and medical check-up benefits are not included. 

c. The policy is available to individuals and family members. 

d. The age limit is five to 70 years. 

e. Children between the age of three months and five years can be covered 
provided one or both parents are covered concurrently. 

f. The sum insured per insured person is restricted to Rs.5,000 and the 
premium payable as per the following table. 
Table 2.1 
Age of the person insured 
Up to 46 
years 
46-55 
56-65 
66-70 
Head of the family 
70 
100 
120 
140 
Spouse 
70 
100 
120 
140 
Dependent child up to 25 years 
50 
50 
50 
50 
For family of 2+1 dependent child 
190 
250 
290 
330 
For family of 2+2 dependent 240 
300 
340 
380
371 
children 

 
Premium qualifies for tax benefit under Section 80D of the Income Tax Act. 

 
Service tax is not applicable to the policy. 

2. Universal Health Insurance Scheme (UHIS) 

This policy is available to groups of 100 or more families. In recent times even 
individual UHIS Policies were made available to the public. 

Benefits 
Following is the list of benefits of universal health insurance scheme: 

 Medical reimbursement 
The policy provides reimbursement of hospitalization expenses up to 
Rs.30,000 to an individual / family subject to the following sub limits. 

Table 2.2 

Particulars 
Limit 
Room, boarding expenses 
Up to Rs.150/- per day 
If admitted in ICU 
Up to Rs.300/- per day 
Surgeon, Anaesthetist, Consultant, Specialists 
fees, Nursing expenses 
Up to Rs.4,500/- per illness/ 
injury 
Anaesthesia, 
Blood, 
Oxygen, 
OT 
charges, 
Medicines, Diagnostic material and X-Ray, 
Dialysis, Radiotherapy, 
Chemotherapy, Cost of pacemaker, Artificial 
limb, etc. 
Up to Rs.4,500/- per illness/ 
injury 
Total expenses incurred for any one illness 
Up to Rs. 15,000/- 

 Personal accident cover 
 Coverage for death of the earning head of the family (as named in the 
schedule) due to accident: Rs.25,000/-. 

 Disability cover 
If the earning head of the family is hospitalised due to an accident / illness 
compensation of Rs. 50/- per day will be paid per day of hospitalisation up to 
a maximum of 15 days after a waiting period of three days. 
 Premium
372 

Table 2.3 

Entity 
Premium 
For an individual 
Rs.365/- per annum 
For a family up to five 
(including the first three children) 
Rs.548/- per annum 
For a family up to seven 
(including the first three children and 
dependent parents) 
Rs.730/- per annum 
Premium subsidy for BPL families 
For families below the poverty line 
the Government will provide a 
premium subsidy.
373 

K. Rashtriya Swasthya Bima Yojana 

The government has also launched various health schemes, some of them 
applicable to particular states. To extend the reach of health benefits to the 
masses, it has implemented the Rashtriya Swasthya Bima Yojana in association 
with insurance companies. RSBY has been launched by the Ministry of Labour 
and Employment, Government of India, to provide health insurance coverage for 
the below poverty line (BPL) families. 

Following are the features of Rashtriya Swasthya Bima Yojana: 

a. Total sum insured of Rs. 30,000 per BPL family on a family floater basis. 

b. Pre-existing diseases to be covered. 

c. Coverage of health services related to hospitalization and services of 
surgical nature which can be provided on a day-care basis. 

d. Cashless coverage of all eligible health services. 

e. Provision of smart card. 

f. Provision of pre and post hospitalization expenses. 

g. Transport allowance of Rs.100/- per visit. 

h. The Central and State Government pays the premium to the insurer. 

i. Insurers are selected by the State Government on the basis of a competitive 
bidding. 

j. Choice to the beneficiary between public and private hospitals. 

k. Premium to be borne by the Central and State governments in the 
proportion of 3:1. Central Government to contribute a maximum amount of 
Rs. 565/- per family. 

l. Contribution by the State Governments: 25 percent of the annual premium 
and any additional premium beyond Rs 750. 

m. Beneficiary to pay Rs. 30/- per annum as registration fee/ renewal fee. 

n. Administrative cost to be borne by the State Government. 

o. Cost of smart card additional amount of Rs. 60/- per beneficiary would be 
available for this purpose.
374 
p. The scheme shall commence operation from the first of the month after the 
next month from the date of issue of smart card. Thus, if the initial smart 
cards are issued anytime during the month of February in a particular 
district, the scheme will commence from 1st of April. 

q. The scheme will last for one year till 31st March of next year. This would be 
the terminal date of the scheme in that particular district. Thus, cards 
issued during the intervening period will also have the terminal date as 31st 
March of the following year. 

Claim settlement to be done through TPA‟s mentioned in the schedule or by 
the insurance company. The settlement is to be made cashless as far as 
possible through listed hospitals. 

Any one illness will be deemed to mean continuous period of illness and it 
includes relapse within 60 days from the date of last consultation with the 
hospital.
375 

L. Pradhan Mantri Suraksha Bima Yojana 

The recently announced PMSBY covering personal accident death and 
disability cover insurance has attracted lot of interest and the scheme 
details are as under: 

Scope of coverage: All savings bank account holders in the age 18 to 70 
years in participating banks are entitled to join. Participating banks must tie 
up with any approved non-life insurer who will offer a Master Policy to such 
bank for the cover. Any person would be eligible to join the scheme through 
one savings bank account only and if he enrols in more than one bank, he 
gets no extra benefit and the extra premium paid will stand forfeited. 
Aadhar would be the primary KYC for the bank account. 

Enrollment Modality / Period: The cover shall be for the one year period 
from 1st June to 31st May for which option to join / pay by auto-debit from 
the designated savings bank account on the prescribed forms will be 
required to be given by 31st May of every year, extendable up to 31st August 
2015 in the initial year. Initially on launch, the period for joining may be 
extended by Govt. of India for another three months, i.e. up to 30th of 
November, 2015. 

Joining subsequently on payment of full annual premium may be possible on 
specified terms. Applicants may give an indefinite / longer option for 
enrolment / auto-debit, subject to continuation of the scheme with terms as 
may be revised on the basis of past experience. Individuals who exit the 
scheme at any point may re-join the scheme in future years through the 
above modality. New entrants into the eligible category from year to year or 
currently eligible individuals who did not join earlier shall be able to join in 
future years while the scheme is continuing. 

Benefits under the insurance are as follows: 

Table of Benefits 
Sum Insured 
Death 
Rs. 2 Lakh 
Total and irrecoverable loss of both 
eyes or loss of use of both hands or 
feet or loss of sight of one eye and 
loss of use of hand or foot 
Rs. 2 Lakh 
Total and irrecoverable loss of sight of 
one eye or loss of use of one hand or 
foot 
Rs. 1 Lakh 

Joining and Nomination facility is available by sms, email or personal visit. 

Premium: Rs.12/- per annum per member. The premium will be deducted 
from the account holder‟s savings bank account through „auto debit‟ facility 
in one instalment on or before 1st June of each annual coverage period.
376 
However, in cases where auto debit takes place after 1st June, the cover 
shall commence from the first day of the month following the auto debit. 
Participating banks will deduct the premium amount in the same month 
when the auto debit option is given, preferably in May of every year, and 
remit the amount due to the Insurance Company in that month itself. 

The premium would be reviewed based on annual claims experience but 
efforts would be made to ensure that there is no upward revision of 
premium in the first three years. 

Termination of cover: The accident cover for the member shall terminate: 
1. On member attaining the age of 70 years (age nearest birth day) or 
2. Closure of account with the Bank or insufficiency of balance to keep the 
insurance in force or 
3. In case a member is covered through more than one account, insurance 
cover will be restricted to one only and the other cover will terminate 
while the premium shall be forfeited. 

If the insurance cover is ceased due to any technical reasons such as 
insufficient balance on due date or due to any administrative issues, the 
same can be reinstated on receipt of full annual premium, subject to 
conditions that may be laid down. During this period, the risk cover will be 
suspended and reinstatement of risk cover will be at the sole discretion of 
Insurance Company.
377 
M. Pradhan Mantri Jan Dhan Yojana 

This financial inclusion campaign for Indian citizens in Banking Savings & Deposit 
Accounts, Remittance, Credit, Insurance and Pension in an affordable manner 
was launched by the Prime Minister of India, Narendra Modi on 28 August 2014 
as announced on his first Independence Day speech on 15 August 2014. This 
scheme has set a world record in bank account opening during any one week. 
Aimed at including maximum number of people in the banking mainstream 

An account can be opened in any bank branch or Business Correspondent (Bank 
Mitra) outlet. PMJDY accounts are being opened with Zero balance. However, if 
the account-holder wishes to get cheque book, he/she will have to fulfill 
minimum balance criteria. 
Special Benefits under PMJDY Scheme 
1. Interest on deposit. 
2. Accidental insurance cover of Rs.1.00 lac 
3. No minimum balance required. 
4. Life insurance cover of Rs.30,000/- 
5. Easy Transfer of money across India 
6. Beneficiaries of Government Schemes will get Direct Benefit Transfer in 
these accounts. 
7. After satisfactory operation of the account for 6 months, an overdraft 
facility will be permitted 
8. Access to Pension, insurance products. 
9. Accidental Insurance Cover 
10. RuPay Debit Card which must be used at least once in 45 days. 
11. Overdraft facility upto Rs.5000/- is available in only one account per 
household, preferably lady of the household. 
As on 13th May 2015, a record 15.59 Crore accounts have been opened with a 
balance in account of Rs. 16,918.91 Crores. Of these, 8.50 Crore accounts 
have been opened with zero balance.
378 
N. Personal Accident and disability cover 

A Personal Accident (PA) Cover provides compensation due to death and 
disability in the event of unforeseen accident. Often these policies provide 
some form of medical cover along with the accident benefit. 

In a PA policy, while the death benefit is payment of 100% of the sum insured, 
in the event of disability, compensation varies from a fixed percentage of the 
sum insured in the case of permanent disability to weekly compensation for 
temporary disablement. 

Weekly compensation means payment of a fixed sum per week of disablement 
subject to a maximum limit in terms of number of weeks for which the 
compensation would be payable. 

1. Types of disability covered 

Types of disability which are normally covered under the policy are: 

i. Permanent total disability (PTD): means becoming totally disabled for 
lifetime viz. paralysis of all four limbs, comatose condition, loss of both 
eyes/ both hands/ both limbs or one hand and one eye or one eye and 
one leg or one hand and one leg, 

ii. Permanent partial disability (PPD): means becoming partially disabled 
for lifetime viz. loss of fingers, toes, phalanges etc. 

iii. Temporary total disability (TTD): means becoming totally disabled for a 
temporary period of time. This section of cover is intended to cover the 
loss of income during the disability period. 

The client has choice to select only death cover or death plus permanent 
disablement of Or Death plus permanent disablement and also temporary 
total disablement. 

2. Sum insured 

Sums insured for PA policies are usually decided on the basis of gross monthly 
income. Typically, it is 60 times of the gross monthly income. However, some 
insurers also offer on fixed plan basis without considering the income level. In 
such policies sum insured for each section of cover varies as per the plan opted. 

3. Benefit plan 

Being a benefit plan, PA policies do not attract contribution. Thus, if a person 
has more than one policy with different insurers, in the event of accidental 
death, PTD or PPD, claims would be paid under all the policies.
379 
4. Scope of cover 

These policies are often extended to cover medical expenses, which reimburses 
the hospitalization and other medical costs incurred following the accident. 
Today we have health policies which are issued to cover medical/ 
hospitalization expenses incurred consequent to an accident. Such policies do 
not cover diseases and their treatment and instead cover only accident related 
medical costs. 

5. Value added benefits 

Along with personal accident, many insurers also offer value added benefits like 
hospital cash on account of hospitalization due to accident, cost of 
transportation of mortal remains, education benefit for a fixed sum and 
ambulance charges on the basis of actual or fixed limit whichever is lower. 

6. Exclusions 

Common exclusions under personal accident cover are: 

i. Any existing disability prior to the inception of policy 

ii. Death or disability due to mental disorders or any sickness 

iii. Directly or indirectly caused by venereal disease, sexually transmitted 
diseases, AIDS or insanity. 

iv. Death or disability caused by radiation, infection, poisoning except 
where these arise from an accident. 

v. Any injury arising or resulting from the Insured or any of his family 
members committing any breach of law with criminal intent. 

vi. Death or disability or Injury due to accidental injury arising out of or 
directly or indirectly connected with or traceable to war, invasion, act 
of foreign enemy, hostilities (whether war be declared or not), civil war, 
rebellion, revolution, insurrection, mutiny, military or usurped power, 
seizure, capture, arrests, restraints and detainments. 

vii. In the event the insured person is a victim of culpable homicide, i.e. 
murder. However, in most policies, in case of murder where the insured 
is not himself involved in criminal activity, it is treated as an accident 
and covered under the policy. 

viii. Death/Disablement/Hospitalization resulting, directly or indirectly, 
caused by, contributed to or aggravated or prolonged by child birth or 
from pregnancy or in consequence thereof.
380 
ix. While the Insured/Insured Person is participating or training for any sport 
as a professional, serving in any branch of the Military or Armed Forces 
of any country, whether in peace or war. 

x. Intentional self-injury, suicide or attempted suicide (whether sane or 
insane) 

xi. abuse of intoxicants or drugs and alcohol 

xii. whilst engaging in aviation or ballooning, whilst mounting into, 
dismounting from or travelling in any aircraft or balloon other than as a 
passenger (fare paying or otherwise) in any duly licensed standard type 
of aircraft anywhere in the world 

Certain policies also exclude loss arising out of driving any vehicle without a 
valid driving license. 

PA policies are offered to individuals, family and also to groups. 

Family Package Cover 

Family package cover may be granted on the following pattern: 

 
Earning member (Persons Insured) and Spouse, if earning: 
Independent capital sum insured for each, as desired, within usual 
limitations as in individual. 

 
Spouse (if not earning member): usually 50 percent of the capital sum 
insured of the earning member. This may be limited to a specified upper 
limit e.g. Rs.1,00,000 or Rs. 3,00,000. 

 
Children (between the age of 5 years and 25 years): usually 25 percent 
of the capital sum insured of the earning parent subject to a specified 
upper limit e.g. Rs. 50,000 per child. 

Group Personal Accident Policies 

Group Personal Accident Policies are usually annual policies only renewal being 
allowed on anniversary. However, non-life and standalone health insurers may 
offer group personal accident products with term less than one year also to 
provide coverage to any specific events. 

Following are different types of group policies: 

 
Employer and Employee relationship 

These policies are granted to firms, association etc. to cover: 

 
Named employees
381 
 
Unnamed employees 

 
Non Employer-Employee relationship 

These policies are granted to associations, societies, clubs, etc. to 
cover: 

 
Named members 
 
Members not identified by name 

(Note: Employees may be covered separately) 

Broken bone policy and compensation for loss of daily activities 

This is a specialised PA policy. This policy is designed to provide cover against 
listed fractures. 

i. Fixed benefit or percentage of sum insured mentioned against each 
fracture is paid at the time of claim. 

ii. Quantum of benefit depends on the type of bone covered and nature of 
fracture sustained. 

iii. To illustrate further, compound fracture would have higher percentage 
of benefit than simple fracture. Again, percentage of benefit for femur 
bone (thigh bone) would have higher percentage over benefit of finger 
bone. 

iv. The policy also covers fixed benefit defined in the policy for loss of daily 
activities viz. eating, toileting, dressing, continence (ability to hold 
urine or stools) or immobility so that insured can take care of cost 
associated to maintain his/her life. 

v. It also covers hospital cash benefit and accidental death cover. 
Different plans are available with varying sums insured and benefit 
payout.
382 

O. Overseas travel insurance 

1. Need for the policy 

An Indian citizen travelling outside India for business, holidays or studies is 
exposed to the risk of accident, injury and sickness during his stay overseas. The 
cost of medical care, especially in countries such as USA and Canada, is very 
high and could cause major financial problems if a person travelling to these 
countries were to meet with an unfortunate accident/ illness. To protect 
against such unfortunate events, travel policies or overseas health and accident 
policies are available. 

2. Scope of coverage 

Such policies are primarily meant for accident and sickness benefits, but most 
products available in the market package a range of covers within one product. 
The covers offered are: 

i. Accidental death / disability 
ii. Medical expenses due to illness / accident 
iii. Loss of checked in baggage 
iv. Delay in arrival of checked in baggage 
v. Loss of passport and documents 
vi. Third party liability for property / personal damages 
vii. Cancellation of trips 
viii. Hijack cover 

3. Types of plans 

The popular policies are the Business and Holiday Plans, the Study Plans and the 
Employment Plans. 

4. Who can provide this insurance 

Overseas or Domestic Travel Insurance policies may only be offered by non-life 
and standalone health insurance companies, either as a standalone product or 
as an add-on cover to an existing health policy, provided that the premium for 
the add-on cover is approved by the Authority under File And Use Procedure. 

5. Who can take the policy 

An Indian citizen travelling abroad on business, holiday or for studies can avail 
this policy. Employees of Indian employers sent on contracts abroad can also be 
covered. 

6. Sum insured and premiums
383 
The cover is granted in US Dollars and generally varies from USD 100,000 to 
USD 500,000. For the section covering medical expenses evacuation, 
repariation, which is the main section. For other sections the S.I. is lower, 
expect for the liability cover. Premiums can be paid in Indian rupees except 
in the case of the employment plan where premium has to be paid in 
dollars. The plans are usually of two types: 

 World-wide excluding USA / Canada 
 World-wide including USA / Canada 

Some products provide for cover in Asian countries only, Schengen countries 
only etc. 

1. Corporate frequent travellers plans 

This is an annual policy whereby a corporate/employer takes individual policies 
for its executives who frequently make trips outside India. This cover can also 
be taken by individuals who fly overseas many times during a year. There are 
limits on the maximum duration of each trip and also the maximum number of 
trips that can be availed in a year. 

An increasingly popular cover today is an annual declaration policy whereby an 
advance premium is paid based on the estimated man days of travel in a year by 
a company‟s employees. 

Declarations are made weekly / fortnightly on the number of days of travel 
employee wise and premium is adjusted against the advance. Provision is also 
given for increase in the number of man days during the currency of the policy, 
as it gets exhausted on payment of additional advance premium. 

The above policies are granted only for business and holiday travels. 

Common exclusions under the OMP include pre-existing diseases. Persons with 
existing ailments cannot obtain cover for taking treatment abroad. 

The health related claims under these policies are totally cashless wherein each 
insurer ties up with an international service provider with network in major 
countries who service the policies abroad.
384 

P. Group health cover 

1. GROUP POLICIES 

As explained earlier in the chapter a group policy is taken by a group owner who 
could be an employer, an association, a bank‟s credit card division, where a 
single policy covers the entire group of individuals. 

Group Health Insurance Policies may be offered by any insurance company, 
provided that all such products shall only be one year renewable contracts. 

Features of group policies- Hospitalisation benefit covers. 

1. Scope of coverage 

The most common form of group health insurance is the policy taken by 
employers covering employees and their families including dependent spouse, 
children and parents / parents in law. 

2. Tailor-made cover 

Group policies are often tailor-made covers to suit the requirements of the 
group. Thus, in group policies, one will find several standard exclusions of the 
individual policy being covered under the group policy. 

3. Maternity cover 

One of the most common extensions in a group policy is the maternity cover. 
This is now being offered by some insurers under individual policies, but with a 
waiting period of two to three years. In a group policy, it normally has a waiting 
period of nine months only and in some cases, even this is waived. Maternity 
cover would provide for the expenses incurred in hospitalization for delivery of 
child and includes C- section delivery. This cover is generally restricted to Rs. 
25,000 to Rs. 50,000 within the overall sum insured of the family. 

4. Child cover 

Children are normally covered from the age of three months only in individual 
health policies. In group policies, coverage is given to babies from day one, 
sometimes restricted to the maternity cover limit and sometimes extended to 
include the full sum insured of the family. 

5. Pre-existing diseases covered, waiting period waived off 

Several exclusions such as the pre-existing disease exclusion, thirty days waiting 
period, two years waiting period, congenital diseases may be covered in a 
tailor-made group policy.
385 
6. Premium calculation 

The premium charged for a group policy is based on the age profile of the group 
members, the size of the group and most importantly the claims experience of 
the group. As the premium varies year on year based on experience, additional 
covers as mentioned above are freely given to the groups, as it is in the interest 
of the group policyholder to manage his claims within the premiums paid. 

7. Non-employer employee groups 

In India, regulatory provisions strictly prohibit formation of groups primarily for 
the purpose of taking out a group insurance cover. When group policies are 
given to other than employers, it is important to determine the relation of the 
group owner to its members. 

Example 

A bank taking a policy for its saving bank account holders or credit card holders 
constitutes a homogenous group, whereby a large group is able to benefit by a 
tailor-made policy designed to suit their requirements. 

Here the premium collected from each individual account holder may be quite 
low, but as a group the premium obtained by the insurer would be substantial 
and the bank offers a value add to its customers in the form of a superior policy 
and at better premium rates. 

8. Pricing 

In group policies, there is provision for discount on premium based on size of 
the group as also the claims experience of the group. Group insurance reduces 
the risk of adverse selection, as the entire group is covered in a policy and 
enables the group holder to bargain for better terms. However, in recent years, 
this segment has seen high loss ratios, primarily due to underpricing of premium 
due to competition. While, this has led to some to review of premium and cover 
by insurers, it is still difficult to declare that the situation has since been 
corrected. 

9. Premium payment 

The premiums could be either totally paid by the employer or group owner, but 
it is usually on a contribution basis by the employees or group members. 
However it is a single contract with the insurer, with the employer/group owner 
collecting the premium and paying the premium covering all the members. 

10. Add-on benefits 

Tailor-made group policies offer covers such as dental care, vision care, and 
cost of health checkup and sometimes, critical illness cover too at additional 
premiums or as complimentary benefits.
386 
Notes: 

IRDAI has laid down conditions for granting of group accident and health covers. 
This protects individuals from being misled by fraudsters into joining invalid and 
money making group policy schemes. 

Recently introduced government health insurance schemes and mass products 
can also be classified as group health covers since the policies are purchased for 
an entire segment of the population by the government. 

Definition 

Group definition could be summarized as below: 

a) A group should consist of persons with a commonality of purpose, and the 
group organizer should have the mandate from a majority of the members of 
the group to arrange insurance on their behalf. 

b) No group should be formed with the main purpose of availing insurance. 

c) The premium charged and benefits available should be clearly indicated in 
the group policy issued to individual members. 

d) Group discounts should be passed on to individual members and premium 
charged should not be more than that given to the insurance company. 

2. CORPORATE BUFFER OR FLOATER COVER 

In most group policies, each family is covered for a defined sum insured, varying 
from Rs. One lac to five lacs and sometimes more. There arise situations where 
the sum insured of the family is exhausted, especially in the case of major 
illness of a family member. In such situations, the buffer cover brings relief, 
whereby the excess expenses over and above the family sum insured are met 
from this buffer amount. 

In short the buffer cover would have a sum insured varying from Rs. ten lacs to 
a crore or more. Amounts are drawn from the buffer, once a family‟s sum 
insured is exhausted. However this utilization is usually restricted to major 
illness / critical illness expenses where a single hospitalization exhausts the sum 
insured. 

The amount that could be utilized by each member from this buffer is also 
capped, often up to the original sum insured. Such buffer covers should be given 
for medium sized policies and a prudent underwriter would not provide this 
cover for low sum insured policies.
387 
Q. Special Products 

1. Disease covers 

In recent years, disease specific covers like cancer, diabetes have been 
introduced in the Indian market, mostly by life insurance companies. The cover 
is long term - 5 years to 20 years and a wellness benefit is also included – a 
regular health check-up paid for by the insurer. There is incentive for better 
control of factors like blood glucose, LDL, blood pressure etc. in the form of 
reduced premiums from second year of policy onwards. On the other hand, a 
higher premium would be chargeable for poor control. 

2. Product designed to cover diabetic persons 

This policy can be taken by persons between 26 and 65 years and is renewable 
up to 70 years. Sum Insured ranges from Rs. 50,000 to Rs. 5,00,000. Capping on 
Room rent is applicable. Product is aimed to cover hospitalization complications 
of diabetes like diabetic retinopathy (eye), kidney, diabetic foot, kidney 
transplant including donor expenses. 

Test Yourself 8 

Though the duration of cover for pre-hospitalization expenses would vary from 
insurer to insurer and is defined in the policy, the most common cover is for 
________ pre-hospitalization. 

I. Fifteen days 
II. Thirty days 
III. Forty Five days 
IV. Sixty days
388 
R. Key terms in health policies 

1. Network Provider 

Network provider refers to a hospital/nursing home/day care center which is 
under tie-up with an insurer/TPA for providing cashless treatment to insured 
patients. Insurers / TPAs normally negotiate favourable discounts on charges 
and fees from such providers who also guarantee a good level of service. 
Patients are free to go to out-of-network providers but there they are generally 
charged much higher fees. 

2. Preferred provider network (PPN) 

An insurer has the option to create a preferred network of hospitals to ensure 
quality treatment and at best rates. When this group is limited to only a select 
few by the insurer based on experience, utilization and cost of providing care, 
then we have what is known as the preferred provider network. 

3. Cashless service 

Experience has shown that one of the causes of debt is borrowing for treatment 
of illness. A cashless service enables the insured to avail of the treatment up to 
the limit of cover without any payment to the hospitals. All that the insured has 
to do is approach a network hospital and present his medical card as proof of 
insurance. The insurer facilitates a cashless access to the health service and 
directly makes payment to the network provider for the admissible amount. 
However, the insured has to make payment for amounts beyond the policy limits 
and for expenses not payable as per policy conditions. 

4. Third party administrator (TPA) 

A major development in the field of health insurance is the introduction of the 
third party administrator or TPA. Several insurers across the world utilize the 
services of independent organizations for managing health insurance claims. 
These agencies are known as the TPAs. 

In India, a TPA is engaged by an insurer for provision of health services which 
includes among other things: 

i. Providing an identity card to the policyholder which is proof of his 
insurance policy and can be used for admission into a hospital 
ii. Providing a cashless service at network hospitals 
iii. Processing of claims 

TPAs are independent entities who are appointed by insurers for processing and 
finalizing health claims. TPAs service health policyholders starting from issuance 
of unique identity cards for hospital admissions up to settlement of claims 
either on cashless basis or reimbursement basis.
389 
Third party administrators were introduced in the year 2001. They are licensed 
and regulated by IRDAI and mandated to provide health services. The minimum 
capital and other stipulations to qualify as a TPA are prescribed by IRDAI. 

Thus health claims servicing are now outsourced by the insurers to the TPAs, at 
a remuneration of five-six percent of the premium collected. 

Third party administrators enter into an MOU with hospitals or health service 
providers and ensure that any person who undergoes treatment in the network 
hospitals is given a cashless service. They are the intermediaries between the 
insurer(s) and the insured(s), who co-ordinate with the hospitals and finalize 
health claims. 

5. Hospital 

A hospital means any institution established for in-patient care and day care 
treatment of sickness and / or injuries and which has been registered as a 
hospital with the local authorities, wherever applicable, and is under the 
supervision of a registered and qualified medical practitioner AND must comply 
with all minimum criteria as under: 
a) has at least 10 inpatient beds in those towns having a population of less 
than 10,00,000 and 15 inpatient beds in all other places; 
b) has qualified nursing staff under its employment round the clock; 
c) has qualified medical practitioner(s) in charge round the clock; 
d) has a fully equipped operation theatre of its own where surgical 
procedures are carried out; 
e) maintains daily records of patients and will make these accessible to the 
Insurance company‟s authorized personnel. 

6. Medical practitioner 

A Medical practitioner is a person who holds a valid registration from the 
medical council of any state of India and is thereby entitled to practice 
medicine within its jurisdiction; and is acting within the scope and jurisdiction 
of his license. However, insurance companies are free to make a restriction that 
the registered practitioner should not be the insured or any close family 
member. 

7. Qualified nurse 

Qualified nurse means a person who holds a valid registration from the Nursing 
Council of India or the Nursing Council of any state in India. 

8. Reasonable and necessary expenses 

A health insurance policy always contains this clause as the policy provides for 
compensation of expenses that would be deemed to be reasonable for 
treatment of a particular ailment and in a particular geographical area.
390 
A common meaning would be the charges incurred that are medically necessary 
to treat the condition, does not exceed the usual level of charges for similar 
treatment in the locality in which it is incurred and does not include charges 
that would not have been made if no insurance existed. 

IRDAI defines Reasonable Charges as the charges for services or supplies, which 
are the standard charges for the specific provider and consistent with the 
prevailing charges in the geographical area for identical or similar services, 
taking into account the nature of the illness / injury involved . 

This clause provides protection to the insurer against inflation of bills by the 
provider and also prevents insured from going in for high end hospitals for 
treatment of common ailments, which could be otherwise done at reasonably 
low costs. 

9. Notice of claim 

Every insurance policy provides for immediate intimation of claim and specified 
time limits for document submission. In health insurance policies, wherever 
cashless facility is desired by the customer, intimations are given well before 
the hospitalization. However in cases of reimbursement claims, the insured 
sometimes does not bother to intimate insurers of the claim and submits the 
documents after a lapse of several days / months. Delay in submission of bills 
could lead to inflation of bills, frauds by insured / hospital, etc. It also affects 
making proper provisions for claims by the insurance company. Hence insurance 
companies usually insist on immediate intimation of claims. The time limit for 
submission of claim documents is normally fixed at 15 days from the date of 
discharge. This enables quick and accurate reporting of claims, and also enables 
the insurer to carry out investigations wherever required. 

IRDA guidelines stipulate that claim intimation/paper submission beyond 
stipulated time should be considered if there is a justifiable reason for the 
same. 

10. Free health check 

In individual health policies, a provision is generally available to give some form 
of incentive to a claim free policyholder. Many policies provide for 
reimbursement of the cost of health check-up at the end of four continuous, 
claim free policy periods. This is normally capped at 1% of the average sum 
insured of the preceding three years. 

11. Cumulative bonus 
Another form of encouraging a claim free policyholder is providing a 
cumulative bonus on the sum insured for every claim free year. This means 
that the sum insured gets increased on renewal by a fixed percentage say 5% 
annually and is allowed up to a maximum of 50% for ten claim-free renewals. 
The insured pays the premium for the original sum insured and enjoys a higher 
cover.
391 

As per IRDAI guidelines, cumulative bonus can be provided only on indemnity 
based health insurance policies and not benefit policies (except PA policies). 
The operation of cumulative bonus should be stated explicitly in the prospectus 
and the policy document. Moreover, if a claim is made in any particular year, 
the cumulative bonus accrued can only be reduced at the same rate at which it 
is accrued. 

Example 

A person takes a policy for Rs. 3 lacs at a premium of Rs. 5,000. In the second 
year, in case of no claims in the first year, he gets a sum insured of Rs. 3.15 lacs 
(5% more than the previous year) at the same premium of Rs. 5,000. This could 
go up to Rs. 4.5 lacs over a ten year claim free renewal. 

12. Malus/ Bonus 

Just as there is an incentive to keep the health policy free of claims, the 
opposite is called a malus. Here, if the claims under a policy are very high, a 
malus or loading of premium is collected at renewal. 

Keeping in view that health policy is a social benefit policy, so far malus is not 
charged on individual health policies.