Hartford Steam Boiler Inspection and Insurance Company, the first boiler insurance company, was 
established in Hartford, Connecticut. 
1873 
The Massachusetts Legislature adopted the first standard fire insurance policy. 
1878 
Fidelity and Casualty Company of New York began providing fidelity and surety bonds. 
1885 
Liability protection was first offered with the introduction of employers liability policies. 
1890 
First policies providing benefits for disabilities from specific diseases were offered. 
1894 
National Board of Fire Underwriters established Underwriters’ Laboratories to investigate and test 
electrical materials to ensure they meet fire safety standards. 
1898 
Travelers Insurance Company issued the first automobile insurance policy in the United States. 
1899 
First pedestrian killed by an automobile, in New York City. 
1910 
New York passed the first United States workers compensation law. It was later found to be 
unconstitutional. 
1911 
Wisconsin enacted the first permanent workers compensation law in the United States. 
1912 
Lloyd’s of London introduced aviation insurance coverage. 
1925 
Massachusetts passed the first compulsory automobile insurance legislation. 

Connecticut passed the first financial responsibility law for motorists. 
1938 
Federal Crop Insurance Act created the first federal crop insurance program. 
1945 
McCarran-Ferguson Act (Public Law 15) was enacted. It provided the insurance industry with a 
limited exemption to federal antitrust law, assuring the pre-eminence of state regulation of the 
industry. 
1947 
New York established the Motor Vehicle Liability Security Fund to cover auto insurance company 
insolvencies. This organization was a precursor of the state guaranty funds established by insurers 
in all states to absorb the claims of insolvent insurers. 
1950 
First package insurance policies for homeowners coverage were introduced. 
1960 
Boston Plan was established to address insurance availability problems in urban areas in Boston. 
1968 
First state-run Fair Access to Insurance Requirements (FAIR) Plans were set up to ensure property 
insurance availability in high-risk areas. 

The federal flood insurance program was established with the passage of the National Flood 
Insurance Act. It enabled property owners in communities that participate in flood reduction 
programs to purchase insurance against flood losses.
1971 
Massachusetts became the first state to establish a true no-fault automobile insurance plan. 
1981 
Federal Risk Retention Act of 1981 was enacted. The law fostered the growth of risk retention 
groups and other nontraditional insurance mechanisms.