3. Extra charges 

The tabular premium is charged for a group of insured individuals who 
are not subject to any significant factors that would pose an extra risk. 
Such individual lives are known as standard lives and the rates charged 
are known as ordinary rates.
185 
If a person proposing for insurance suffers from certain health problems 
like heart ailments or diabetes, it can pose a hazard to his life. Such a 
life is considered to be sub-standard, in relation to other standard lives. 
The insurer may decide to impose an extra premium by way of a health 
extra. Similarly an occupational extra may be imposed on those engaged 
in a hazardous occupation, like a circus acrobat. These extras would 
result in the premium being more than the tabular premium. 

Again, an insurer may offer certain extra benefits under a policy, which 
are available on payment of an extra premium. 

Example 

A life insurer may offer a double accident benefit or DAB (where double 
the sum assured is payable as a claim if death is a result of accident). For 
this it may charge an extra premium of one rupee per thousand sum 
assured. 

Similarly a benefit known as Permanent Disability Benefit (PDB) may be 
availed by paying an extra per thousand sum assured. 

4. Determining the premium 

Let us now examine how life insurers arrive at the rates that are 
presented in the premium tables. This task is performed by an actuary. 
The process of setting the premium in case of traditional life insurance 
policies like term insurance, whole life and endowment considers 
following elements: 

 Mortality 
 Interest 
 Expenses of management 
 Reserves 
 Bonus loading
186 
Diagram 2: Components of Premium 

The first two elements give us the Net premium. By adding [also called 
„loading‟] the other elements to the net premium we get the gross or 
office premium 

a) Mortality and Interest 

Mortality is the first element in premiums. It is the chance or 
likelihood that a person of a certain age would die during a given 
period, of typically one year. To find out the expected Mortality of a 
person, we use a “Mortality Table”, which gives us an estimate of the 
rate of mortality for different ages. 

Example 

If the mortality rate for age 35 is 0.0035 it implies that out of every 
1000 people who are alive as on age 35, 3.5 (or 35 out of 10,000) are 
expected to die between age 35 and 36. 

The table may be used to calculate mortality cost for different ages. 
For example the rate of 0.0035 for age 35 implies a cost of insurance 
of 0.0035 x 1000 (sum assured) = Rs. 3.50 per thousand sum assured.
187 
The above cost may be also called the “Risk Premium”. For higher 
ages the risk premium would be higher. 

Consider a person aged 35. If he wants to take life insurance cover 
for a term of twenty years [age 35 to 55], the insurance company 
must have sufficient money available to meet the cost of claims that 
can arise if he dies at any time during this period. This cost can be 
found out by summing up the individual risk premiums for different 
ages from age 35 to 55. 

The total cost of these claims, as summed up above, would give us 
the future liabilities under a policy. In other words it tells us how 
much money is needed by an insurer to pay claims that may arise in 
future. 

Since Life insurers collect premiums at the beginning of a given term, 
these premiums earn interest. While estimating the amount money 
that would be needed at hand to pay claims that may arise in future 
[future liabilities], it is necessary to take this factor of interest into 
account. 

Interest is simply the discount rate we assume for arriving at the 
present value of future claim payments that have to be made. 

Example 

If we need to have Rs. 5 per thousand to meet the cost of insurance 
after five years and if we assume a rate of interest of 6%, the present 
value of Rs. 5 payable after five years would be 5 x 1/ (1.06)5 = 3.74. 

If instead of 6% we were to assume 10%, the present value would be 
only 3.10. In other words the higher the rate of interest assumed, the 
lower the present value. 

From our study of mortality and interest there are two major 
conclusions we can derive 

 Higher the mortality rate in the mortality table, higher the 
premiums would be 
 Higher the interest rate assumed, lower the premium 

Actuaries, who are responsible for arriving at these estimates, tend to 
be prudent and a little conservative. The mortality rates they assume 
would be typically higher than what they expect to be the actual
188 
experience. They would also assume a lower interest rate than what 
they expect to earn from their investments. 

Net premium 

The estimates of mortality and interest give the “Net Premium” 
which is the estimate of present value of future claim costs. 

Gross premium 

Diagram 3: Guiding Principles for determining Amount of Loading 

Gross premium is the net premium plus an amount called loading. 
There are three considerations or guiding principles that needs to be 
borne in mind when determining the amount of loading: 

i. Adequacy 

The total loading from all policies must be sufficient to cover the 
company‟s total operating expenses. It should also provide a margin 
of safety and finally it should contribute to the profits or surplus of 
the company. 

ii. Equity 

Expenses and safety margins etc. should be equitably apportioned 
[divided and shared] among various kinds of policies, depending on 
type of plan, age and term etc. The idea is that each class of policy 
should pay for its own costs, so that to the extent possible, one class 
of policy does not subsidise [pay for] another.
189 
iii. Competitiveness 

The resulting gross premiums should enable the company to improve 
its competitive position. If the loading is too high, it would make the 
policies very costly and people would not buy. 

b) Expenses and reserves 

Life insurers have to incur various types of operating expenses 
including: 

 Agents training and recruitment, 
 Commissions of agents, 
 Staff salaries, 
 Office accommodation, 
 Office stationery, 
 Electricity charges, 
 Other miscellaneous etc. 

All these have to be paid from premiums that are collected by 
insurers. These expenses are loaded to the net premium. 

A life insurer incurs two types of expenses: 

i. The first, known as “New Business Expenses”, are incurred at the 
beginning stage of the contract 

ii. The second type of expenses, known as “Renewal Expenses,” is 
incurred during subsequent years. 

Initial or new business expenses can be substantial. Life insurers are 
also required by law to hold certain margins as reserves to ensure 
they can meet their obligations even in those situations when their 
actual experience is worse than assumed. The initial expenses along 
with the margins required to be maintained as reserves are typically 
higher than the initial premiums received by the life insurer. 

The company thus faces a strain, known as new business strain. The 
initial outflow is only recovered from subsequent annual premiums. 
An implication is that life insurers cannot afford to have large number 
of their policies cancelled or lapsing in initial years, before the 
expenses are recouped. Another implication of new business strain is 
that life insurance companies begin to make profits only after a 
gestation period of some years.
190 
Expenses are also determined in different ways, depending on the 
type of expense. 

i. For instance, commissions and incentives for agency managers / 
development officers are typically decided as a percentage of the 
premiums earned. 
ii. On the other hand, expenses like medical examiners‟ fees and 
policy stamps vary depending on the amount of sum assured or 
face value of the policy and are considered in relation to the sum 
assured. 

iii. A third category of expenses is overheads like salaries and rents 
which generally vary with the amount of activities. These in turn 
depend on the number of policies being serviced. More the 
number of policies, higher the overhead expenses. 

All the above types of expenses are All the above types of expenses 
are suitably loaded to the net premium. 

Lapses and contingencies 

Apart from expenses, the life insurer also constantly faces the risk 
that actual experience may be different from the assumptions made 
at the stage of designing the contract. 

One source of risk is that of lapses and withdrawals. A lapse means 
that the policyholder discontinues payment of premiums. In case of 
withdrawals, the policyholder surrenders the policy and receives an 
amount from the policy‟s acquired cash value. 

Lapses can pose a serious problem. They usually happen within the 
first three years with highest incidence being typically in the very first 
year of the contract. Life insurers incorporate a loading in 
anticipation of leakages that may arise as a result. 

Life insurers must also be prepared for the eventuality that the 
assumptions on basis of which they set their premiums differs from 
actual experience. Towards this purpose they include a loading 
margin in the premium, which could help to absorb any adverse loss 
that may arise between expected and actual experience.
191 
c) With Profit policies and Bonus loading 

During the early years of the life insurance industry, the major 
uncertainty faced was about the rate of mortality. Life insurers solved 
the problem by charging excessive premiums in advance. This would 
ensure that they remained solvent even in adverse situations. When, 
in the light of sufficient experience, it was found that the premiums 
were higher than what was needed, life insurers would return the 
excess or some of it to policyholders by way of bonus additions. This 
was the origin of the traditional with profit policies we find today 

Participation in profits also ushered an element called “Bonus 
Loading” into premiums. The idea was to provide a margin for profits 
as a loading in the premium, such that it served as an added cushion 
against unforeseen contingencies and also paid for the policy‟s share 
of surplus distributed (as bonus). 

In sum we can say that: 

Gross premium = Net premium + Loading for expenses + Loading 
for contingencies + Bonus loading 

Test Yourself 1 

What does a policy lapse mean? 

I. Policyholder completes premium payment for a policy 
II. Policyholder discontinues premium payment for a policy 
III. Policy attains maturity 
IV. Policy is withdrawn from the market
192 
B. Surplus and bonus 

1. Determination of surplus and bonus 

Every life insurance company is expected to undertake a periodic 
valuation of its assets and liabilities. Such a valuation has two purposes: 

i. To assess the financial state of the life insurer, in other words to 
determine if it is solvent or insolvent 
ii. To determine the surplus available for distribution among 
policyholders / share holders 

Definition 

Surplus is the excess of value of assets over value of liabilities. If it is 
negative, it is known as a strain. 

Let us now see how the concept of surplus in life insurance is different 
from that of profit of a firm. 

Firms in general look at profits in two ways. Firstly, profit is the excess 
of income over outgo for a given accounting period, as it appears in the 
profit and loss account. Profit also forms part of the balance sheet of a 
firm - it may be defined as the excess of assets over liabilities. 

In both instances, profits are determined at the end of the accounting 
period. 

Example 

The profits of XYZ firm as on 31stMarch 2013, is given as its income less 
expenses or its assets less liabilities as on that date. 

In both instances, the profit is clearly defined and is known. 

Can we apply a similar argument and specify the liabilities and assets in 
case of a life insurance valuation? 

For life insurers, as for other firms, the surplus is determined as the 
excess of assets over liabilities. 

Surplus = Assets - Liabilities
193 
Let us understand what the liabilities are. For a given block of life 
insurance policies, the life insurer has to make provision for meeting 
future claims, expenses and other expected pay-outs that may arise. The 
insurer also expects to receive premiums for these policies. Liabilities 
are thus determined as the present value of all payments that have to be 
made less the present value of premiums expected to be received on 
these policies. The present value is arrived at by applying a suitable rate 
of discount [the interest rate] 

Diagram 4: Ways of Valuing Assets 

Let us now look at how assets are valued. This can be done in one of 
three ways 

i. At Book Value 

This is the value at which the life insurer has purchased or acquired 
its assets 

ii. At Market Value 

The worth of the life insurer‟s assets in the market place 

iii. Discounted Present Value 

Estimating the future income stream from various assets and 
discounting them to the present 

The problem is that one cannot place an exact value on liabilities 
because one cannot precisely predict what will happen in the future. 
The value of liabilities depends on assumptions about factors like 
mortality, interest, expenses and persistency which are made while
194 
estimating the present value of future liabilities. It is for this reason that 
in life insurance we use the term surplus instead of profits. 

Surplus is thus a function of how assets and liabilities are valued. 

i. When a life insurer is very conservative in its valuation, it would 
result in liabilities being overvalued than otherwise while assets 
are undervalued. As a result the surplus that is declared would be 
reduced. This means lesser bonuses would be available for 
distribution among current policyholders. But it would also 
contribute to financial soundness of the insurer, since the actual 
amount of surplus is higher than the declared surplus and so higher 
provisions can be retained for the future. This would benefit 
future policyholders. 

ii. On the other hand, if assets and liabilities are valued liberally, it 
has the opposite result. Current policyholders would be benefited 
at the expense of future ones. 

The life insurance company has to strike the right balance between 
current and future policyholders. 

2. Allocating the surplus 

Surplus arises as a result of the life insurer‟s actual experience being 
better than what it had assumed. Under with profit contracts, the life 
insurer is obliged to pass on the benefits of such a favourable gap 
(between the actual and expected results) to policyholders who have 
agreed to participate in the profits and have purchased these with profit 
policies. 

At the same time, surplus is also a source for increasing the company‟s 
basic capital (its equity or net worth). It contributes to the life insurer‟s 
financial soundness. 

Let us now see how the surplus that is determined would be allocated 

a) Solvency requirements 

Firstly, life insurers have to maintain a solvency margin which may be 
defined as the portion of surplus assets over liabilities that are 
specifically set aside to serve as a cushion to meet any unforeseen 
deviations between expected and actual experience.
195 
b) Free assets 

Another purpose for having surplus that is unallocated (for 
distribution) is to increase the level of free assets. Free assets are 
unencumbered. In other words they are not required for meeting any 
specific liabilities. The life insurer is thus free to use them for various 
purposes like business expansion. 

Once the divisible surplus is declared, the next issue is to determine their 
distribution among the life insurer‟s policyholders (after leaving a portion 
for distribution among shareholders if any). 

In India, the popular method for the purpose has been the “Bonus 
Mechanism” where surplus is distributed in the form of a bonus. This 
system is popular in the United Kingdom, India and many other countries. 

3. Bonus 

Bonus is paid as an addition to the basic benefit payable under a 
contract. Typically it may appear as an addition to basic sum assured or 
basic pension per annum. It is expressed, for example, as Rs. 60 per 
thousand sum assured (or 60% of SA). 

The most common form of bonus is the reversionary bonus. The 
company is expected to declare such bonus additions each year, 
throughout the lifetime of the contract. Once declared, they get 
attached and cannot be taken away. They form part of the liabilities of 
the company. They are called „Reversionary‟ bonuses because the 
policyholder only receives them when the contract becomes a claim by 
death or maturity. 

Bonuses may also be payable on surrender. In such cases it is often 
stipulated that the contract should have run for a certain term (say 5 
years) to become eligible.
196 
Types of reversionary bonuses 

Diagram 5: Types of Reversionary Bonuses 

i. Simple Reversionary Bonus 

This is a bonus expressed as a percentage of the basic cash benefit 
under the contract. In India for example, it is declared as amount per 
thousand sum assured. 

ii. Compound Bonus 

Here the company expresses a bonus as a percentage of basic benefit 
and already attached bonuses. It is thus a bonus on a bonus. A way to 
express it may be as @ 8% of basic sum assured plus attached bonus. 

One may also have Super Compound bonus, where the bonus is arrived 
at as a percentage of basic benefit and applying another percentage 
for attached bonus. For instance it may be expressed as @8% of basic 
sum assured and @10% of attached bonus. 

iii. Terminal Bonus 

As the name suggests, this bonus attaches to the contract only on its 
contractual termination (by death or maturity). The bonus is declared 
only for claims of the ensuing year without any commitment about 
subsequent years (as in case of reversionary bonuses). Thus the
197 
terminal bonus declared for 2013 would only apply to claims that have 
arisen during 2013-14 and not for subsequent years. 

Finally, terminal bonuses depend on the time duration of the 
contract, and increases as the duration increases. Thus the terminal 
bonus for a contract that has run for 25 years would be higher than 
one which has run for 15 years. 

4. The Contribution Method 

Another method of distribution of surplus which has been adopted in 
North America is the “Contribution” method. Under this method, 
consideration is given to three sources of surplus - excess interest, 
mortality savings and savings arising with respect to expense and other 
loadings. 

The surplus is thus given by the difference between what was expected 
to happen and what actually happened over the year with respect to 
mortality, interest and expenses 

The dividends that are declared may be used in one of the following four 
ways 

i. It may be paid in the form of dividends in cash 

ii. In the form of adjustment to, and reduction in future premiums 

iii. A third method is to allow purchase of non-forfeitable paid up 
additions to the policy 

iv. Finally dividends may be allowed to accumulate, with interest, to 
the credit of the policy. It may be either withdrawn at the option 
of policyholder or only at the end of the contract 

5. Unit Linked Policies 

Traditional “With Profit” policies, as discussed above, contain a linkage 
between the bonuses they pay and the investment performance of the 
life insurer. The linkage however is not direct. The policyholder‟s bonus 
is determined by the surplus that is declared during the periodic 
valuation of the insurer‟s assets and liabilities. As a result, the bonus 
structure does not directly reflect the value of the underlying assets of 
the insurer. 
Again, bonuses are generally only declared once a year. They obviously 
cannot reflect the daily fluctuations in the value of assets. Unit linked
198 
policies have been designed precisely to overcome some of the 
limitations spelt out above. 

They involve a different approach to the design of products and follow a 
different set of principles. 

a) Unitising 

The distinctive feature of these policies is that their benefits are 
wholly or partially determined by the value of units credited to the 
policyholder‟s account at the date when the claim payment is due to 
be made. A unit is created through the division of an investment fund 
into a number of equal parts. 

b) Transparent structure 

The charges for insurance protection and expenses component of a 
unit linked product are clearly specified. Once these charges are 
deducted from the premium the balance of the account and income 
from it is invested in units. The value of these units is fixed with 
reference to a pre-determined index of performance. 

It is defined by a rule or formula, which is outlined in advance. Two 
independent persons, by following this formula, would arrive at the 
same estimate of benefits. Policy holder benefits, in other words, do 
not depend on the assumptions and discretions of the life insurance 
company 

c) Pricing 

In traditional plans like endowment, the insured decides the amount 
of sum assured to be purchased. This sum assured is guaranteed and 
the premium is set such that, under given assumptions of mortality, 
interest and expenses, it would be adequate to pay this amount. If 
the actual experience is better than the assumptions made while 
setting the premiums, the benefit is passed on in the form of a bonus. 

Under unit linked policies, the insured decides what amount of 
premium he / she can contribute at regular intervals. The premium 
may vary, subject to a minimum that may need to be paid. The 
insurance cover is a multiple of the premiums paid – for example it 
may be ten times the annual premium. 
The premium is divided into three parts
199 
i. Firstly there is a policy allocation charge (PAC) which is comprised 
of agents‟ commission, policy setup costs, administrative costs and 
statutory levies. 

ii. The second component is the mortality charge which is the cost of 
providing risk cover. 

iii. The balance of premiums after meeting the above two, are 
allocated for the purchase of units. 

The PAC as a proportion of the premiums is high in the initial years, 
both under traditional and ULIP plans. Under the former, these 
charges are apportioned and spread out throughout the policy term. 
In the case of ULIPs however they are deducted from the initial 
premiums itself. This implies that in the initial stages, the charges 
would significantly reduce the amount allocated for investment. This 
is why the value of the benefits, vis-à-vis the premiums paid, would 
be very low. It would in fact be less than the premiums paid in the 
early years of the contract. 

d) The bearing of investment risk 

Finally, since the value of the units depends on the value of the life 
insurer‟s investments, there is a risk that these unit values may be 
lower than expected and result in the returns being low and even 
negative. The life insurer, while being expected to manage these 
investments in an efficient and prudent manner, does not give any 
guarantee about the unit values. The investment risk, in other words, 
is borne by the policyholder/unit holder. The life insurer may 
however bear the mortality and expense risk. 

Test Yourself 1 

Who bears the investment risk in case of ULIPs? 

I. Insurer 
II. Insured 
III. State 
IV. IRDA
200 
Summary 

 In ordinary language, the term premium denotes the price that is paid 
by an insured for purchasing an insurance policy. 

 The process of setting the premium for life insurance policies involves 
consideration of mortality, interests, expense management and 
reserves. 

 Gross premium is the net premium plus an amount called loading. 

 A lapse means that the policyholder discontinues payment of 
premiums. In case of withdrawals, the policyholder surrenders the 
policy and receives an amount from the policy‟s acquired cash value. 

 Surplus arises as a result of the life insurer‟s actual experience being 
better than what it had assumed. 

 Surplus 
allocation 
could 
be 
towards 
maintaining 
solvency 
requirements, increasing free assets etc. 

 The most common form of bonus is the reversionary bonus. 

Key Terms 

1. Premium 
2. Rebate 
3. Bonus 
4. Surplus 
5. Reserve 
6. Loading 
7. Reversionary bonus 

Answers to Test Yourself 

Answer 1 

The correct option is II. 

Policyholder discontinuing premium payment for a policy is termed as 
policy lapse.
201 
Answer 2 

The correct option is II. 

Insured bears the investment risk in case of ULIP. 

Self-Examination Questions 

Question 1 

What does the term “premium” denote in relation to an insurance policy? 

I. Profit earned by the insurer 
II. Price paid by an insured for purchasing the policy 
III. Margins of an insurer on a policy 
IV. Expenses incurred by an insurer on a policy 

Question 2 

Which of the below is not a factor in determining life insurance premium? 

I. Mortality 
II. Rebate 
III. Reserves 
IV. Management expenses 

Question 3 

What is a policy withdrawal? 

I. Discontinuation of premium payment by policyholder 
II. Surrender of policy in return for acquired surrender value 
III. Policy upgrade 
IV. Policy downgrade 

Question 4 

Which of the below is one of the ways of defining surplus? 

I. Excessive liabilities 
II. Excessive turnover 
III. Excess value of liabilities over assets 
IV. Excess value of assets over liabilities
202 
Question 5 

Which of the below is not a component of ULIP premiums? 

I. Policy allocation charge 
II. Investment risk premium 
III. Mortality charge 
IV. Social security charge 

Question 6 

Life insurance companies may offer rebate to the buyer on the premium 
that is payable on the basis of ___________. 

I. Sum assured chosen by the buyer 
II. Type of policy chosen by the buyer 
III. Term of the plan chosen by the buyer 
IV. Mode of payment (cash, cheque, card) chosen by the buyer 

Question 7 

Interest rates are one of the important components used while 
determining the premium. Which of the below statement is correct with 
regards to interest rates? 

I. Lower the interest rate assumed, lower the premium 
II. Higher the interest rate assumed, higher the premium 
III. Higher the interest rate assumed, lower the premium 
IV. The interest rates don‟t affect premiums 

Question 8 

Which of the below statement is correct? 
I. Business strain is the difficulty faced by the companies in securing 
new business 
II. Business strain arises at the end of the policy term. 
III. Business strain arises because of excess premium 
IV. Business strain arises because of excess expenses at the new 
business stage . 

Question 9 

With regards to valuation of assets by insurance companies, __________ 
is the value at which the life insurer has purchased or acquired its assets.
203 
I. Discounted future value 
II. Discounted present value 
III. Market value 
IV. Book value 

Question 10 

In case of __________, a company expresses the bonus as a percentage of 
basic benefit and already attached bonuses. 

I. Reversionary bonus 
II. Compound bonus 
III. Terminal bonus 
IV. Persistency bonus 

Answers to Self-Examination Questions 

Answer 1 

The correct option is II. 

Price paid by an insured for purchasing the policy is termed as premium. 

Answer 2 

The correct option is II. 

Rebate is not a factor in determining life insurance premium. 

Answer 3 

The correct option is II. 

Surrender of policy in return for acquired surrender value is termed as 
policy withdrawal. 

Answer 4 

The correct option is IV. 

Excess value of assets over liabilities is one way of defining surplus.
204 
Answer 5 

The correct option is IV. 

ULIP premium comprises of policy allocation charge, investment risk 
premium and mortality charge. 

Answer 6 

The correct option is I. 

Life insurance companies may offer rebate to the buyer on the premium 
that is payable on the basis of sum assured chosen by the buyer. 

Answer 7 

The correct option is III. 

Higher the interest rate assumed, lower the premium 

Answer 8 

The correct option is IV 

Business strain arises because of excess expenses at new business stage. 

Answer 9 

The correct option is IV. 

With regards to valuation of assets by insurance companies, book value is 
the value at which the life insurer has purchased or acquired its assets. 

Answer 10 

The correct option is II. 

In case of compound bonus, a company expresses the bonus as a 
percentage of basic benefit and already attached bonuses.
205 
CHAPTER 12 

DOCUMENTATION – PROPOSAL STAGE 

Chapter Introduction 

In the life insurance industry we deal with a large number of forms and 
documents. These are required for the purpose of bringing clarity in the 
relationship between the insured and the insurer. In this chapter, we shall deal 
with the various documents that are involved at the proposal stage and their 
significance. The documents we shall consider include 

i. Prospectus 
ii. Proposal form 
iii. Agent‟s report 
iv. Medical examiner‟s report 
v. Moral hazard report 
vi. Age proof 
vii. Know Your Customer (KYC) documents 

Learning Outcomes 

A. Life insurance – Proposal stage documentation
206 

A. Life insurance – Proposal stage documentation 

1. Prospectus 

Definition 

A prospectus is a formal legal document used by insurance companies that 
provides details about the product. 

A prospectus should contain all facts that are necessary for a prospective 
policyholder to make an informed decision regarding purchase of a policy. 

The prospectus used by a life insurance company should state the following, 
under each of its plans of insurance: 

i. The terms and conditions 

ii. Scope of benefits – guaranteed and non-guaranteed 

iii. The entitlements 

iv. The exceptions 

v. Whether the plan is participative or non-participative 

The prospectus is like an introductory document which helps the prospective 
policyholder to get familiar with the company‟s products. 

2. Proposal form 

The insurance policy is a legal contract between insurer and the policyholder. 
As is required for any contract, it has a proposal and its acceptance. The 
application document used for making the proposal is commonly known as the 
„proposal form‟. All the facts stated in the proposal form become binding on 
both the parties and failure to appreciate its contents can lead to adverse 
consequences in the event of claim settlement. 

Definition 

The proposal form has been defined under IRDAI (Protection of Policyholders‟ 
Interests) Regulations, 2002 as: 

“It means a form to be filled in by the proposer for insurance for furnishing all 
material information required by the insurer in respect of a risk, in order to 
enable the insurer to decide whether to accept or decline, to undertake the 
risk, and in the event of acceptance of the risk, to determine the rates, terms 
and conditions of a cover to be granted.”
207 
―Material‖ for the purpose of these regulations shall mean and include all 
important, essential and relevant information in the context of underwriting the 
risk to be covered by the insurer. 

Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority (I.R.D.A.) (Standard Proposal-
Form for Life-Assurance) Regulations, 2013, Notified on 16th February, 2013, 
provides for a Standard Proposal-Form, for Individual Policies in Life-Assurance, 
that has an In-Built Flexibility for Seeking an Additional or Specialized 
Information, that is Product-Specific or Specific to a Particular Risk-Category, 
with a View to ensuring that, it takes into Consideration, All Relevant 
Questions, that are Required to Understand the Need for a Particular Product, 
and Make a Recommendation to the Prospect, bringing in the Transparency, and 
thereby, Protecting the Prospect‟s Interests. 

While the IRDAI defined the proposal form, the design and content of the 
form was left open to the discretion of the insurance company. 
Annexure-A. 
Standard Proposal-Form for Life-Assurance. 
Affix, Latest, Pass-Port-Size Photo-Graph 
Name of Insurance-Company: --- 
Servicing-Branch-Name: --- 
Complete Address of Servicing-Branch: --- 
Agency or Broker, Name and Contact-Details: --- 
License-Number and Validity-Details: --- 
Name of the Product: --- 
Sum-Assured: --- 
Term of the Product: ---
208 
Premium-Paying-Term: --- 
Premium-Payment-Mode (One-Time or Annual or Half-Yearly or Quarterly, etc.): 
--- 
--- 
(Signature of Proposer.) 
--- 
(Signature of Agent or Broker or Bancassurance) 
--- 
(Signature of Insurer {At the Time of Acceptance of Proposal}) 
Instructions for Proposer {Please Follow These, Carefully.}: 
1. It is Necessary for the Proposer to fill-up this Proposal-Form, Him-Self or Her-
Self, and not allow an Intermediary or Any Third-Party to do it. How-Ever, in 
Case, the Proposer is Not in a Position to do so, or the Details are filled-in by the 
Proposer, in Vernacular, He or She must ensure that, the Details filled-in are Read-
Out to Him or Her and that they are Understood by Him or Her. He or She must 
make a Declaration to this Effect, as indicated in Section-D of this Form. 
2. Please Read All the Questions, Carefully, and Fill-Up the Details, Truthfully.
209 
3. Please ensure that, You affix Your Signatures in All the Places, as required. In 
Certain Places, More Than One Signature is required. This is in Your Own 
Interest. 
4. Wherever the Intermediary (Agent or Broker or Bancassurance) is required to 
sign, please ensure that, the same has been done by Him or Her. 
5. This Form contains 4 Sections, namely: 
Section-A contains the Details of Proposer, which is, Mandatory. 
Section-B contains Specialized or Additional Information, which may vary, based 
on the Product. 
Section-C contains Suitability-Analysis, which is Highly Recommended; and 
Section-D contains the Product-Proposed, which is, Mandatory. 
6. For Proposer and Each Life-Assured, Separate Forms are to be Submitted. 
7. Signature or Thumb-Impression of Life-Assured and / or Proposer, sought 
Twice, in His or Her Interest.
210 
Instructions to the Intermediary (Agent or Bancassurance or Broker) {Please 
Follow These, Carefully.}: 
1. It is highly recommended that, the Proposer is advised by You, to give 
Information, required for Suitability Analysis as per Section-C of the Form, in His 
or Her Own Interest. 
2. Please ensure that, the Product Recommended suits the Needs of the Proposer. 
3. Do Not Fill-Up the Proposal-Form or Any Column of the Form, on Behalf of 
the Proposer, even if requested to do so. 
4. Please ensure that, You affix Your Signature(s), wherever required in the Form. 
5. Please ensure that, the Proposer and Each Life-Assured, Separate Forms are 
collected.
211 
Section-A: Details of Proposer and / or Life-Assured. 
(Mandatory) 
1. Personal Details: 
a. Name: --- 
b. Spouse’s Name: --- 
c. Father’s Name: --- 
d. Mother’s Name: --- 
e. Gender: --- 
f. Date-of-Birth: ----/----/-------- 
g. Age-Proof: --- 
h. Identification-Marks: --- 
i. Address-for-Communication: --- 
j. Permanent-Address: --- 
k. Address-Proof (Electricity-Bill or Telephone-Bill or Ration-Card) {Any 
One is to be submitted.}: --- 
l. Telephone (Land-Line or Mobile): --- 
m. E-Mail Id: --- 
n. Marital-Status: --- 
o. Nationality: --- 
p. Educational-Qualifications: --- 
q. Habits, impacting the Health, Adversely: 
i. 
Smoking or Other Tobacco-Related Habits: Yes / No.
212 
a) If Yes, Whether Occasionally or Frequently: --- 
ii. 
Consuming the Alcohol: Yes / No. 
a) If Yes, Whether Occasionally or Frequently: --- 
iii. 
Drug-Abuse: Yes / No. 
a) If Yes, Whether Occasionally or Frequently: --- 
r. Habits, having a Positive Impact on the Health: Yes / No. 
If Yes, Specify the Details: --- 
2. Identification-Proof {Any One is to be submitted.}: 
a. Permanent-Account-Number (P.A.N.): --- 
b. AADHAAR (आधार)-Card-Number: --- 
c. Ration-Card or Driving-License or Pass-Port Number: --- 
3. Family-Details: 
a. Number of Dependents: --- 1 2 3 4 5 
b. Details of Dependents: --- 
c. Name: --- 
d. Male or Female: --- 
e. Relationship: --- 
f. Age: --- 
g. Date-of-Birth: ----/----/-------- 
h. Occupation: ---
213 
i. Whether Financially-Dependent: --- 
4. If Employed, Employment-Details: 
a. Occupation: --- 
b. Nature-of-Work: --- 
c. Length-of-Service: --- 
d. Annual Income (Rupees): --- 
e. Details of Income-Proof Submitted: --- 
f. Whether Covered Under Pension-Scheme: --- 
g. Normal Retirement-Age: --- 
5. If Self-Employed, Details: 
a. Occupation: 
b. Nature-of-Work: --- 
c. Projected Active Working-Life: --- 
d. Annual Income (Rupees): --- 
e. If Labour, Number of Working-Days: --- 
6. Pension-Details, If Any, If Not Employed or Self-Employed: 
a. Employer’s Scheme or Insurance: --- 
b. Personal Contribution or Premium: 
c. Retirement-Age: 
d. Anticipated-Value:
214 
7. Bank-Details: 
a. Do You Have a Bank-Account? Yes / No. 
b. If Yes, Account-Number: --- 
c. Account-Type: --- 
d. Bank-Name and Branch: 
8. Details of Nominee and Appointee {Where, Nominee is a Minor, Appointee-
Details also have to be furnished.}: 
Nominee 

Appointee 
a. Name: