a) The first stage of documentation is the proposal form through which the 
insured informs about herself and what insurance she needs 

b) The duty of disclosure of material information arises prior to the inception 
of the policy, and continues throughout the policy period 

c) Insurance companies usually add a declaration at the end of the Proposal 
form to be signed by the proposer. 

d) Elements of a proposal form usually include: 

i. Proposer‟s name in full 
ii. Proposer‟s address and contact details 
iii. Bank details in case of health policies 
iv. Proposer‟s profession, occupation or business 
v. Details and identity of the subject matter of insurance 
vi. Sum insured 
vii. Previous and present insurance 
viii. Loss experience 
ix. Declaration by the insured 

e) An agent, who acts as the intermediary, has the responsibility to ensure all 
material information about the risk is provided by the insured to insurer. 

f) The process of scrutinising the proposal and deciding about acceptance is 
known as underwriting. 

g) In health policies, a Prospectus is also provided to the insured and he has to 
declare in the proposal that he has read and understood it 

h) Premium is the consideration or amount paid by the insured to the insurer 
for insuring the subject matter of insurance, under a contract of insurance. 

i) Payment of premium can be made by cash, any recognised banking 
negotiable instrument, postal money order, credit or debit card, internet, e-
transfer, direct credit or any other method approved by authority from time 
to time. 

j) A certificate of insurance provides proof of insurance in cases where it may 
be required 

k) The policy is a formal document which provides an evidence of the contract 
of insurance. 

l) A warranty is a condition expressly stated in the policy which has to be 
literally complied with for validity of the contract.
343 
m) If certain terms and conditions of the policy need to be modified at the time 
of issuance, it is done by setting out the amendments / changes through a 
document called endorsement. 

n) The most important rule of construction is that the intention of the parties 
must prevail and this intention is to be looked for in the policy itself. 

o) Money Laundering means converting money obtained through criminal means 
to legal money and laws to fight this have been introduced worldwide and in 
India 

p) An agent has a responsibility to follow the Know Your Customer guidelines 
and obtain documents as required by these guidelines. 

Key Terms 

a) Policy form 
b) Advance payment of premium 
c) Certificate of Insurance 
d) Renewal notice 
e) Warranty 
f) Condition 
g) Endorsement 
h) Money Laundering 
i) Know Your Customer
344 
CHAPTER 19 

HEALTH INSURANCE PRODUCTS 
Chapter Introduction 

This chapter will give you an overall insight into the various health insurance 
products offered by insurance companies in India. From just one product – 
Mediclaim to hundreds of products of different kinds, the customer has a wide 
range to choose appropriate cover. The chapter explains the features of various 
health products that can cover individuals, family and group. 

Learning Outcomes 

A. Classification of health insurance products 
B. IRDA guidelines on Standardization in health insurance 
C. Hospitalization indemnity product 
D. Top-up covers or high deductible insurance plans 
E. Senior citizen policy 
F. Fixed benefit covers – Hospital cash, critical illness 
G. Long term care product 
H. Combi-products 
I. Package policies 
J. Micro insurance and health insurance for poorer sections 
K. Rashtriya Swasthya Bima Yojana 
L. Pradhan Mantri Suraksha Bima Yojana 
M. Pradhan Mantri Jan Dhan Yojana 
N. Personal accident and disability cover 
O. Overseas travel insurance 
P. Group health cover 
Q. Special products 
R. Key terms in health policies 

After studying this chapter, you should be able to: 

a) Explain the various classes of health insurance 
b) Describe the IRDAI guidelines on standardization in health insurance 
c) Discuss the various types of health products available in the Indian market 
today 
d) Explain Personal Accident insurance 
e) Discuss overseas travel insurance 
f) Understand key terms and clauses in health policies
345 

A. Classification of health insurance products 

1. Introduction to health insurance products 

The Health Insurance Regulations of IRDA define health cover as follows 

Definition 

“Health insurance business” or “health cover” means the effecting of insurance 
contracts which provide for sickness benefits or medical, surgical or hospital 
expense benefits, including assured benefits and long-term care, travel 
insurance and personal accident cover. 

Health insurance products available in the Indian market are mostly in the 
nature of hospitalization products. These products cover the expenses incurred 
by an individual during hospitalization. Again, these types of expenses are very 
high and mostly beyond the reach of the common man due to increasing cost of 
healthcare, surgical procedures, new and more expensive technology coming in 
the market and cost of newer generation of medicines. In fact, it is becoming 
very difficult for an individual even if he is financially sound to bear such high 
expenses without any health insurance. 

Therefore, health insurance is important mainly for two reasons: 

 Providing financial assistance to pay for medical facilities in case of 
any illness. 

 Preserving the savings of an individual which may otherwise be wiped 
out due to illness. 

The first retail health insurance product covering hospitalization costs – 
Mediclaim - was introduced by the 4 public sector insurers in 1986. These 
companies also introduced a couple of other covers like Bhavishya Arogya Policy 
covering proposers at a young age for their post-retirement medical costs, the 
Overseas Mediclaim policy offering travel insurance and Jana Arogya Bima policy 
for the poorer people. 

Later insurance sector was opened up to the private sector players, which led to 
many more companies entering including the health insurance market. With 
that came greater spread of this business, a number of variations in these 
covers and also a few new covers too. 

Today, the health insurance segment has developed to a large extent, with 
hundreds of products offered by almost all general Insurance companies stand 
along health insurers and life insurers. However, the basic benefit structure of 
the Mediclaim policy i.e. cover against hospitalization expenses still remains the 
most popular form of insurance.
346 
As per Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority (Health Insurance) 
Regulations, 2016 

1. Life Insurance Companies may offer long term health products but the 
premium for such products shall remain unchanged for at least a period 
of every block of three years, thereafter the premium may be reviewed 
and modified as necessary. 
2. Non-Life and Standalone Health insurance companies may offer 
individual health products with a minimum tenure of one year and a 
maximum tenure of three years, provided that the premium shall remain 
unchanged for the tenure. 

3. In Order to Facilitate the Offering of Innovative Covers by Insurers, 
„Pilot-Products‟ may be Designed and Filed for Approval of the 
Authority, in accordance with the Product-Filing Guide-Lines, Specified 
by the Authority. Pilot-Products, referred herein, can be offered, Only 
by General-Insurers and Health-Insurers, for Policy-Tenure of 1 Year. 
Every Pilot-Product may be offered Up To a Period, Not Exceeding 5 
Years. After 5 Years of Launch of the Pilot-Product, the Product needs 
to get converted into a Regular Product, or Based on Valid Reasons, may 
be Withdrawn, Subject to the Insured, Being Given an Option, to Migrate 
to Another Product, Subject to the Portability-Conditions. The Authority 
may specify the Guide-Lines for Pilot-Products, From-Time-To-Time. 
Where, a Pilot-Product gets converted into a Regular Product, Any 
Exception made in these Regulations, for Pilot-Products, shall, No Longer 
Apply; and the Insurer shall Ensure the Compliance with All the 
Provisions of these Regulations. 

Pilot-Product is a Close-Ended Product, with a Policy-Term of 1 Year, that 
may be Offered-for-Sale, by General-Insurers or Health-Insurers, for a Period, 
Not Exceeding 5 Years, From the Date of Launch of the Product, with a View to 
Giving a Scope to Innovation, for Covering the Risks, that Have Not Been 
Offered Hitherto or Stand-Excluded in the Extant-Products. 

2. Features of health policies 

Health insurance basically deals with sickness and therefore expenses incurred 
due to sickness. Sometimes, the disease contracted by a person could be 
chronic or long lasting, lifelong or critical in terms of impact on day to day 
living activities. Expenses could also be incurred due to accidental injuries or 
due to disablement arising out of accident. 

Various customers with different life styles, paying capacity and health status 
would have different requirements which need to be considered while designing 
suitable products to be offered to each customer segment. Customers also 
desire comprehensive cover while buying health insurance which would cover all 
their needs. At the same time, to achieve greater acceptability and bigger
347 
volume, health insurance products need to be kept affordable, they should also 
be easy to understand for the customer and also for the sales team to market 
them. 

These are some of the desirable features of health insurance products which the 
insurance companies try to achieve in different forms for the customer. 

3. Broad classification of health insurance products 

Whatever be the product design, health insurance products can be broadly 
classified into 3 categories: 

a) Indemnity covers 

These products constitute the bulk of the health insurance market and pay 
for actual medical expenses incurred due to hospitalization. 

b) Fixed benefit covers 

Also called as „hospital cash‟, these products pay for a fixed sum per day for 
the period of hospitalization. Some products also have a fixed graded 
surgery benefit incorporated in the product. 

c) Critical illness covers 

This is a fixed benefit plan for payout on occurrence of a pre-defined critical 
illness like heart attack, stroke, cancer etc. 

The world over health and disability insurance go together but in India, 
personal accident cover has traditionally been sold independent of health 
insurance. 
Also health insurance usually does not include expenses incurred whilst outside 
India. For this purpose, another product – overseas health insurance or travel 
insurance - needs to be purchased. Only in recent times, a few high end health 
insurance products of private insurers include overseas insurance cover as part 
of regular health insurance cover, subject to certain terms and conditions. 

4. Classification based on customer segment 

Products are also designed keeping in mind the target customer segment. The 
benefit structure, pricing, underwriting and marketing for each segment is quite 
distinct. Products classified based on customer segments are: 

a) Individual cover offered to retail customers and their family members 

b) Group cover offered to corporate clients, covering employees and groups, 
covering their members 

c) Mass policies for government schemes like RSBY covering very poor sections 
of the population.
348 
B. IRDA Guidelines on Standardization in health insurance 

With so many insurers providing numerous varied products and with different 
definitions of various terms and exclusions, confusion arose in the market. It 
became difficult for the customer to compare products and for third party 
administrators to pay claims against products of individual companies. 
Moreover, in critical illness policies, there was no clear understanding as to 
what was a critical illness and what was not. Maintaining electronic data for the 
health insurance industry was also becoming difficult. 

To remove the confusion among insurers, service providers, TPAs and hospitals 
and the grievances of the insuring public, various organizations like IRDA, 
service providers, hospitals, Health Advisory Committee of the Federation of 
Chambers of Commerce and Industry got together to provide some kind of 
standardization in health insurance. Based on a common understanding, IRDA 
issued Guidelines on standardization in health insurance in 2016. 
The guidelines now provide for standardization of: 

1. definitions of commonly used insurance terms 
2. definitions of critical illnesses 
3. list of excluded items of expenses in hospitalization indemnity policies 
4. claim forms and pre-authorization forms 
5. billing formats 
6. discharge summary of hospitals 
7. standard contracts between TPAs, insurers and hospitals 
8. standard File and Use format for getting IRDAI for new policies 

This has been a big step to improve the quality of service of the health 
providers and the insurance industry and will also help in collection of 
meaningful health and health insurance data.
349 

C. Hospitalization indemnity product 

An indemnity based health insurance policy is the most common and highest 
sold health insurance product in India. The Mediclaim policy introduced in the 
eighties by the PSU insurers was the earliest standard health product and was 
the only product available in the market for a long time. Though this product, 
with a few changes, is marketed by different insurers under different brand 
names, Mediclaim continues to be the largest selling health insurance in the 
country. 

Hospitalization indemnity products protect individuals from the expenditure 
they may need to incur in the event of hospitalisation. In most of the cases, 
they also cover a specific number of days before and after hospitalisation, but 
exclude any expenses not involving hospitalisation. 

Such a cover is provided on an ‗indemnity‘ basis, that is, by making good part 
or all of the expenses incurred or amount spent during hospitalisation. This may 
be contrasted with the insurance coverage on ‗benefit‘ basis, where the 
amount that will be paid on the occurrence of a certain event (like 
hospitalisation, diagnosis of critical illness or each day of admission) is as stated 
in the insurance policy and is not related to the actual expenditure incurred. 

Example 

Raghu has a small family consisting of his wife and a 14 year old son. He has 
taken a Mediclaim policy, covering each member of his family, from a health 
insurance company, for an individual cover of Rs. 1 lakh each. Each of them 
could get recovery of medical expenses up to Rs. 1 lakh in case of 
hospitalisation. 

Raghu was hospitalised due to heart attack and required surgery. The medical 
bill raised was Rs. 1.25 lakhs. The insurance company paid Rs 1 lakh according 
to the plan coverage and Raghu had to pay the remaining amount of Rs. 25,000 
from his own pocket. 

The main features of the indemnity based Mediclaim policy are detailed below, 
though variations in limits of cover, additional exclusions or benefits or some 
add-ons may apply to products marketed by each insurer. The student is 
advised that the following is only a broad idea about the product and he should 
acquaint himself with the product of the particular insurer he wishes to know 
more about. He also needs to educate himself about some of the medical 
terms that may be used. 

1. Inpatient hospitalization expenses 
An indemnity policy pays the insured the cost of hospitalization expenses 
incurred on account of illness / accident.
350 
All expenses may not be payable and most products define the expenses 
covered which normally include: 

i. Room, boarding and nursing expenses as provided by the hospital / 
nursing home. This includes nursing care, RMO charges, IV fluids / blood 
transfusion / injection administration charges and similar expenses 

ii. Intensive Care Unit (ICU) expenses 

iii. Surgeon, anesthetist, medical practitioner, consultants, specialists fees 

iv. Anesthetic, 
blood, 
oxygen, 
operation 
theatre 
charges, 
surgical 
appliances, 

v. Medicines and drugs, 

vi. Dialysis, chemotherapy, radiotherapy 

vii. Cost of prosthetic devices implanted during surgical procedure like 
pacemaker, orthopedic implants, infra cardiac valve replacements, 
vascular stents 

viii. Relevant laboratory / diagnostic tests and other medical expenses 
related to the treatment 

ix. Hospitalization expenses (excluding cost of organ) incurred on donor in 
respect of organ transplant to the insured 

A regular hospitalization indemnity policy covers expenses only if the duration 
of stay in hospital is for 24 hours or more. However with advancements in 
medical technologies, treatment procedures for many surgeries do not require 
hospitalization. Now as daycare procedures, they can be conducted at 
specialized daycare centers or hospitals as the case may be. Treatments such as 
eye surgeries, chemotherapy; dialysis etc. can be classified under daycare 
surgeries and the list is ever growing. These are also covered under the policy. 

Coverage of outpatient expenses is still very limited in India, with very few such 
products offering OPD covers. However there are some plans that cover 
treatment as outpatient and also related health care expenses associated with 
doctor visits, regular medical tests, dental and pharmacy costs. 

2. Pre and post hospitalization expenses 

i. Pre hospitalization expenses 

Hospitalization could be either emergency hospitalization or planned. If a 
patient goes in for a planned surgery, there would be expenses incurred by 
him prior to the hospitalization.
351 

Definition 

IRDA Health Insurance Standardization guidelines define Pre-hospital expenses 
as: 

Medical expenses incurred immediately before the insured person is 
hospitalized, provided that: 

a) Such Medical Expenses are incurred for the same condition for which the 
Insured Person‟s Hospitalization was required, and 

b) The In-patient Hospitalization claim for such Hospitalization is admissible by 
the Insurance Company. 

Pre hospitalization expenses could be in the form of tests, medicines, 
doctors‟ fees etc. Such expenses relevant and pertaining to the 
hospitalization are covered under the health policies. 

ii. Post hospitalization expenses 

After stay in the hospital, in most cases there would be expenses related to 
recovery and follow-up. 

Definition 

Medical Expenses incurred immediately after the Insured Person is dischared 
from hospital, provided that: 

a) Such Medical Expenses are incurred for the same condition for which the 
Insured Person‟s Hospitalization was required, and 
b) The In-patient Hospitalization claim for such Hospitalization is admissible by 
the Insurance Company. 

Post hospitalization expenses would be relevant medical expenses incurred 
during period up to the defined number of days after hospitalization and will be 
considered as part of claim. 

Post hospitalization expenses could be in the form of medicines, drugs, review 
by doctors etc. after discharge from hospital. Such expenses have to be related 
to the treatment taken in hospital and are covered under the health policies. 

Though the duration of cover for pre and post hospitalization expenses would 
vary from insurer to insurer and is defined in the policy, the most common 
cover is for thirty days pre and sixty days post hospitalization. 

Pre and post-hospitalization expenses form part of the overall sum insured for 
which cover is granted under the policy.
352 
a) DOMICILIARY HOSPITALIZATION 

Although this benefit is not commonly used by policyholders, an individual 
health policy also has a provision to take care of expenses incurred for 
medical treatment taken at home without being admitted to a hospital. 
However, the condition is that though the illness requires attention at a 
hospital, the condition of the patient is such that he cannot be moved to a 
hospital or there is lack of accommodation in hospitals. 

This cover usually carries an excess clause of three to five days meaning 
that treatment costs for the first three to five days have to be borne by the 
insured. The cover also excludes domiciliary treatments for certain chronic 
or common oilments such as Asthma, Bronchitis, Chronic Nephritis and 
Nephritic Syndrome, Diarrhoea and all type of Dysenteries including 
Gastroenteritis, Diabetes Mellitus Epilepsy, Hypertension, Influenza, Cough 
and Cold, fevers. 

b) COMMON EXCLUSIONS 

Some of the usual exclusions under hospitalization indemnity policies are 
given below. These are based on the suggested exclusions detailed in the 
Guidelines on Standardization in Health Insurance issued by IRDAI 
particularly Annexure IV. The student is advised to acquaint himself with the 
guidelines available on the IRDAI website. 

It must be noted that if any of the exclusions are waived or any additional 
exclusions are imposed as per File and Use approved terms, these must be 
stated separately in the Customer Information Sheet and the policy. 

1. Pre-existing diseases 

This is almost always excluded under individual health plans since otherwise 
it would mean covering a certainty and poses a high risk to the insurer. One 
of the important disclosures required at the time of taking a health policy is 
regarding previous history of ailments / injuries of each insured person 
covered. This will enable the insurer to decide on accepting the proposal for 
insurance. 

Definition 

The IRDA guidelines on standardisation define Pre-existing as 
“Any condition, ailment or injury or related condition(s) for which you had signs 
or 
symptoms, 
and/or 
were 
diagnosed, 
and/or 
received 
medical 
advice/treatment within 48 months prior to the first policy issued by the 
insurer.”
353 

The exclusion is: Any pre-existing condition(s) as defined in the policy, until 48 
months of continuous coverage of such insured person have elapsed, since 
inception of his / her first policy with the company. 

2. Weight control programs/ supplies/ services 
3. Cost of spectacles/ contact lenses/ hearing aids etc. 
4. Dental treatment expenses that do not require hospitalisation 
5. Hormone replacement 
6. Home visit charges 
7. Infertility/ subfertility/ assisted conception procedure 
8. Obesity (including morbid obesity) treatment 
9. Psychiatric & psychosomatic disorders 
10. Corrective surgery for refractive error 
11. Treatment of sexually transmitted diseases 
12. Donor screening charges 
13. Admission/registration charges 
14. Hospitalisation for evaluation/ diagnostic purpose 
15. Expenses for investigation/ treatment irrelevant to the disease for which 
admitted or diagnosed 
16. Any expenses when the patient is diagnosed with retro virus and/or 
suffering from HIV/ AIDS etc. is detected directly or indirectly 

17. Stem cell implantation/ surgery and storage 

18. War and nuclear related causes 

19. All non-medical items such as registration charges, admission fees, 
telephone, television charges, toiletries, etc. 

20. A waiting period of 30 days from inception of policy is normally 
applicable in most policies for making any claim. This however will not 
be applied for hospitalization due to an accident. 

Example 

Mira had taken a health insurance policy for coverage of expenses in the event 
of hospitalisation. The policy had a clause for initial waiting period of 30 days. 

Unfortunately, 20 days after she took the policy, Mira contracted malaria and 
was hospitalised for 5 days. She had to pay heavy hospital bills. 

When she asked for reimbursement from the insurance company, they denied 
payment of the claim because the event of hospitalization occurred within the 
waiting period of 30 days from taking the policy. 

i. Waiting periods: This is applicable for diseases for which typically 
treatment can be delayed and planned. Depending on the product,
354 
waiting periods of one / two / four years apply for diseases such as 
Cataract, Benign Prostatic Hypertrophy, Hysterectomy for Menorrhagia 
or Fibromyoma, Hernia, Hydrocele, Congenital internal disease, Fistula 
in anus, piles, Sinusitis and related disorders, Gall Bladder Stone 
removal, 
Gout 
and 
Rheumatism, 
Calculus 
Diseases, 
gout 
and 
rheumatism, age related osteoarthritis, osteoporosis. 

c) COVERAGE OPTIONS AVAILABLE 

i. Individual coverage 

An individual insured can cover himself along with family members such as 
spouse, dependent children, dependent parents, dependent parents in law, 
dependent siblings etc. Some insurers do not have a restriction on the 
dependents who can be covered. It is possible to cover each of such 
dependent insureds under a single policy with a separate sum insured chosen 
for each insured person. In such covers, each person insured under the 
policy can claim upto the maximum amount of his sum insured during the 
currency of the policy. Premium will be charged for each individual insured 
according to his age and sum insured chosen and any other rating factor. 

ii. Family floater 

In the variant known as a family floater policy, the family consisting of 
spouse, dependent children and dependent parents are offered a single sum 
insured which floats over the entire family. 

Example 

If a floater policy of Rs. 5 lacs is taken for a family of four, it means that during 
the policy period, it will pay for claims related to more than one family member 
or multiple claims of a single member of the family. All these together cannot 
exceed the total coverage of Rs. 5 lacs. Premium will normally be charged 
based on the age of the oldest member of the family proposed for insurance. 

The covers and exclusions under both these policies would be the same. 
Family floater policies are getting popular in the market as the entire family 
gets coverage for an overall sum insured which can be chosen at a higher 
level at a reasonable premium. 

d) SPECIAL FEATURES 

A number of changes to existing coverages and new value added features 
have been added to the basic indemnity cover offered under the earlier 
Mediclaim product. We shall discuss some of these changes. It is to be noted 
that not all products carry all the below mentioned features, and they may 
vary from insurer to insurer and product to product.
355 
i. Sub limits and Disease specific capping 

Some of the products have disease specific capping e.g. cataract. A few also 
have sub limits on room rent linked to sum insured e.g. per day room rent 
restricted to 1% of sum insured and ICU charges to 2% of sum insured. As 
expenses under other heads such as ICU charges, OT charges and even 
surgeon‟s fees are linked to the type of room opted for, room rent capping 
helps in restricting expenses under other heads also and hence the overall 
hospitalization expenses. 

ii. Co-payment (popularly called Co-pay) 

A co-payment is a cost-sharing requirement under a health insurance policy 
that provides that the policyholder/insured will bear a specified percentage 
of the admissible claim amount. A co-payment does not reduce the Sum 
Insured. 

This ensures that the insured exercises caution in selecting his options and 
thus reduces his overall hospitalization expenses voluntarily. 

iii. Deductible 

Deductible is a cost-sharing requirement under a health insurance policy 
that provides that the insurer will not be liable for a specified rupee amount 
in case of indemnity policies and for a specified number of days/hours in 
case of hospital cash policies which will apply before any benefits are 
payable by the insurer. A deductible does not reduce the Sum Insured. 

Insurers are to define whether the deductible is applicable per year, per life 
or per event and the specific deductible to be applied. 

iv. New exclusions have been introduced and later standardized by IRDAI: 

 Genetic disorders and stem cell implantation / surgery. 

 External and or durable Medical / Non-medical equipment of any 
kind used for diagnosis and or treatment including CPAP, CAPD, 
Infusion pump etc., ambulatory devices i.e. walker, crutches, belts, 
collars, caps, splints, slings, braces, stockings etc. of any kind, 
diabetic foot wear, glucometer / thermometer and similar related 
items etc. and also any medical equipment which is subsequently 
used at home etc. 

 Any kind of Service charges, Surcharges, Admission fees / 
Registration charges etc. levied by the hospital 

 Doctor‟s home visit charges, Attendant / Nursing charges during pre 
and post hospitalization period
356 
v. Zone wise premium 

Normally, the premium would depend on the age of the insured person and 
the sum insured selected. Premium differential has been introduced in 
certain zones with higher claims cost e.g. Delhi and Mumbai form part of 
highest premium zone for certain products by some insurers. 

vi. Coverage of pre-existing diseases 

In view of regulatory requirement, pre-existing diseases which were 
excluded earlier are specifically mentioned with a waiting period of four 
years. Few high end products by some insurance companies have reduced 
the period to 2 and 3 years. 

vii. Renewability 

Lifelong renewability was introduced by few insurers. Now, this has been 
made compulsory by IRDAI for all policies. 

viii. Coverage for Day care procedure 

Advancement of medical science has seen inclusion of large number of 
procedures under day care category. Earlier only seven procedures were 
specifically mentioned under daycare - Cataract, D and C, Dialysis, 
Chemotherapy, Radiotherapy, Lithotripsy and Tonsillectomy. Now, more 
than 150 procedures are covered and the list keeps growing. 

ix. Cost of pre policy check up 

Cost of medical examination was earlier borne by prospective clients. Now 
insurer reimburses the cost, provided the proposal is accepted for 
underwriting, the reimbursement varying from 50% to 100%. Now this has 
also been mandated by IRDAI that insurer would bear at least 50% of health 
checkup expenses. 

x. Duration of pre and post hospital cover 

Duration of pre and post hospital coverage is extended to 60 days and 90 
days by most insurers especially in their high end product. Few insurers have 
also capped these expenses linked to certain percentage of claim amount, 
subject to a maximum limit. 

xi. Add on covers 

Various new additional covers called Add-on covers have been introduced by 
some of the insurers. Some of them are: 

 Maternity cover: Maternity was not offered earlier under retail policies 
but is now offered by most insurers, with varying waiting periods.
357 
 Critical illness cover: Available as an option under the high end version 
products for certain ailments which are life threatening and entail 
expensive treatment. 

 Reinstatement of sum insured: After payment of claim, the sum insured 
(which gets reduced on payment of a claim) can be restored to the 
original limit by paying extra premium. 

 Coverage for AYUSH – Ayurvedic – Yoga - Unani – Siddha – Homeopath: 
Few policies cover expenses towards AYUSH treatment up to a certain 
percentage of the hospitalization expenses. 

xii. Value added covers 

Few indemnity products include value added covers as listed below. The 
benefits are payable up to the limit of sum insured specified against each 
cover in the schedule of the policy, not exceeding the overall sum insured. 

 Outpatient cover: As we know health insurance products in India mostly 
cover only in-patient hospitalization expenses. Few companies now 
offer limited cover for out-patient expenses under some of the high-end 
plans. 

 Hospital cash: This provides for fixed lump sum payment for each day of 
hospitalization for a specified period. Normally the period is granted for 
7 days excluding the policies deductible of 2/3 days. Thus, the benefit 
would trigger only if hospitalization period is beyond the deductible 
period. This is in addition to the hospitalization claim but within the 
overall sum insured of the policy or may be with a separate sub-limit. 

 Recovery benefit: Lump sum benefit is paid if the total period of stay in 
hospital due to sickness and/or accident is not less than 10 days. 

 Donor‘s expenses: The policy provides for reimbursement of expenses 
towards donor in case of major organ transplant as per the terms and 
condition defined in the policy. 

 Reimbursement of ambulance: Expenses incurred towards ambulance 
by Insured/insured person are reimbursed up to a certain limit specified 
in the schedule of the policy. 

 Expenses for accompanying person: This is intended to cover the 
expenses incurred by accompanying person towards food, transportation 
whilst attending to insured patient during the period of hospitalization. 
Lump sum payment or reimbursement payment as per the policy terms is 
paid, up to the limit specified in the schedule of the policy. 

 Family definition: Definition of family has undergone changes in few 
health products. Earlier, primary insured, spouse, dependent children
358 
were granted cover. Now there are policies where parents and in-laws 
can also be granted cover under the same policy. 

D. Top-up covers or high deductible insurance plans 

A top-up cover is also known as a high deductible policy. Most people in the 
international markets buy top-up covers in addition to high co-pay policies or 
uncovered diseases or treatment. However in India, the key reason for 
introduction of top-up cover initially seems to be lack of high sum insured 
products, though the same is no longer the case. The maximum amount of cover 
under a health policy remained at Rs 5,00,000 for a very long time. Anyone 
wanting a higher cover was forced to buy two policies paying double the 
premium. This led to the development of the Top-Up policies by insurers, which 
offers cover for high sums insured over and above a specified amount (called 
threshold). 

This policy works along with a basic health cover having a low sum insured and 
comes at a comparatively reasonable premium. For example, Individuals 
covered by their employers can also opt for a top-up cover for additional 
protection (keeping the sum insured of the first policy as the threshold). This 
can be for self and family, which comes in handy in the unfortunate event of 
high cost treatment. 

To be eligible to receive a claim under the top-up policy, the medical costs 
must be greater than the deductible (or threshold) level chosen under the plan 
and the reimbursement under the high deductible plan would be the amount of 
expense incurred i.e. greater than the deductible 

Example 

An individual is covered for a sum insured of Rs. 3 lacs by his employer. He 
could opt for a top-up policy of Rs. 10 lacs in excess of Rs. three lacs. 

If the cost of a single hospitalization is Rs. 5 lacs, the basic policy would cover 
up to Rs. three lacs only. With the top-up cover, the balance sum of Rs. two 
lacs would be paid out by the top-up policy. 

Top-up policies come cheap and the cost of a single Rs. 10 lacs policy would be 
far higher than the top-up policy of Rs. 10 lacs in excess of Rs. three lacs. 

These covers are available on individual basis and family basis. Individual sum 
insured for each family member covered or a single sum insured floating over 
the family are offered in the market today. 

In case the top-up plan requires the deductible amount to be crossed at every 
single event of hospitalization, the plan is known as a Catastrophe based high 
deductible plan. This means that to be payable, in the example given above, 
each and every claim must cross Rs. 3 lacs
359 
However top-up plans that allow the deductible to be crossed post a series of 
hospitalizations during the policy period are known as Aggregate based high 
deductible plans or Super top-up cover as known in the Indian market. This 
means that, in the example given above, each and every claim is added and 
when this crosses Rs. 3 lacs, the Top-up cover would start paying claims. 

Most of the standard terms, conditions and exclusions of a hospital indemnity 
policy apply to these products. In some markets, where basic health cover is 
provided by the Government, insurers mostly deal only with granting the Top-Up 
covers.
360 
E. Senior citizen policy 

These plans are designed to offer cover to elderly people who often were 
denied coverage after certain age (e.g. people over 60 years of age). The 
structure of the coverage and exclusions are much like a hospitalization policy. 

Special attention is paid to diseases of the elderly in setting coverage and 
waiting period. Entry age is mostly after 60 years and renewable lifelong. Sum 
insured range from Rs. 50,000 to Rs. 5,00,000. There is variation of waiting 
period applicable to certain ailments. Example: Cataract may have 1 year 
waiting for one insurer and 2 year waiting period for some other insurer. 

Also certain ailments may not have waiting period for a particular insurer where 
as another may have. Example: Sinusitis does not fall in waiting period clause of 
some insurers but few others include it in their waiting period clause. 

Pre-existing disease has either a waiting period or capping in some policies. Pre-
post hospital expenses are either paid as a percentage of hospital claims or a 
sub limit whichever is higher. In some policies they follow the typical indemnity 
plans such as expenses falling within specified period of 30/60 days or 60/90 
days. 

IRDAI has mandated special provisions for insured persons who are Senior 
Citizens: 
1. The premium charged for health insurance products offered to senior 
citizens shall be fair, justified, transparent and duly disclosed upfront. 
2. The insured shall be informed in writing of any underwriting loading 
charged over and above the premium and the specific consent of the 
policyholder for such loadings shall be obtained before issuance of a 
policy. 
3. All health insurers and TPAs shall establish a separate channel to address 
the health insurance related claims and grievances of senior citizens.
361 
F. Fixed benefit covers - Hospital cash, critical illness 

The greatest risk to an insurer in a health insurance policy is unnecessary and 
unreasonable use of the policy benefits. Knowing that the patient is covered 
under a health policy, doctors, surgeons and hospitals tend to over treat him. 
They prolong the length of stay in the hospital, carry out unnecessary diagnostic 
and laboratory tests and thus inflate the cost of treatment beyond the 
necessary amount. Another major impact on insurer‟s costs is the constant rise 
in medical costs, usually higher than the increase in premium rates. 

The answer to this is the Fixed Benefit cover. While providing adequate 
protection to the insured persons, the fixed benefits cover also help the insurer 
to effectively price his policy for a reasonable duration. In this product, 
commonly occurring treatments are listed under each system such as ENT, 
Ophthalmology, Obstetrics and Gynaecology, etc. and the maximum pay out for 
each of these is spelt out in the policy. 

The insured also gets a fixed sum as claim amount irrespective of the amount 
spent by him for the named treatment. The package charges payable for each 
of these treatments is generally based on a study of the reasonable cost that 
would be needed for treating the condition. 

The package charges would include all components of the cost such as: 

a) Room rent, 
b) Professional fees, 
c) Diagnostics, 
d) Drugs, 
e) Pre and post hospitalization expenses etc. 

The package charges could even include diet, transport, ambulance charges etc. 
depending on the product. 

These policies are simple to administer as only proof of hospitalization and 
coverage of ailment under the policy are sufficient to process the claim. 

Some products package a daily cash benefit along with the fixed benefit cover. 
The list of treatments covered could vary from around 75 to about 200 
depending on the definitions of the treatments in the product. 

A provision is made to pay a fixed sum for surgeries / treatment which do not 
find a place in the list named in the policy. Multiple claims for different 
treatments are possible during the policy period. However the claims are finally 
limited by the sum insured chosen under the policy. 

Some of the fixed benefit insurance plans are: 

 Hospital daily cash insurance plans 
 Critical illness insurance plans
362 
1. HOSPITAL DAILY CASH POLICY 

a) Per day amount limit 

Hospital cash coverage provides a fixed sum to the insured person for each 
day of hospitalization. Per day cash coverage could vary from (for example) 
Rs. 1,500 per day to Rs. 5,000 or even more per day. An upper limit is 
provided on the daily cash payout per illness as well as for the duration of 
the policy, which is usually an annual policy. 

b) Number of payment days 

In some of the variants of this policy, the number of days of daily cash 
allowed is linked to the disease for which treatment is being taken. A 
detailed list of treatments and duration of stay for each is stipulated which 
limits the daily cash benefit allowed for each type of procedure/ illness. 

c) Standalone cover or add-on cover 

The hospital daily cash policy is available as a standalone policy as offered 
by some insurers while, in other cases, it is an add-on cover to a regular 
indemnity policy. These policies help the insured to cover incidental 
expenses as the payout is a fixed sum and not related to the actual cost of 
treatment. This also allows the payout under the policy to be provided in 
addition to any cover received under an indemnity based health insurance 
plan. 

d) Supplementary cover 

These policies could supplement a regular hospital expenses policy as it is 
cost effective and provides compensation for incidental expenses and also 
expenses not payable under the indemnity policy such as exclusions, co-pay 
etc. 

e) Other advantages of the cover 

From the insurer‟s point of view, this plan has several advantages as it is 
easy to explain to a customer and hence can be sold more easily. It beats 
medical inflation as a fixed sum per day is paid for the duration of 
hospitalization whatever may be the actual expense. Also, acceptance of 
such insurance covers and claims settlements are really simplified. 

2. CRITICAL ILLNESS POLICY 

This product is also known as the dreaded disease cover or a trauma care 
cover.
363 
With advancement in medical science, people are surviving some of the 
major diseases like cancer, strokes and heart attack etc. which in earlier 
times would have resulted in death. Again, life expectancy has increased 
considerably after surviving such major illnesses. However surviving a major 
illness entails huge expense for treatment as well as for living expenses post 
treatment. Thus onset of critical illness threatens financial security of a 
person 

a) Critical illness policy is a benefit policy with a provision to pay a lump 
sum amount on diagnosis of certain named critical illness. 

b) It is sold: 
 As a standalone policy or 
 As an add-on cover to a few health policies or 
 As an add-on cover in some life insurance policies 
In India, critical illness benefits are most commonly sold by life insurers as 
riders to life policies and two forms of cover are offered by them – accelerated 
CI benefit plan and standalone CI benefit plan. Precise definition of the covered 
illnesses and good underwriting are extremely important when this benefit is 
sold. To avoid confusion, the definitions of 20 most common critical illnesses 
have been standardized under IRDA Health Insurance Standardization guidelines. 
(Please refer to the Annexure at the end). 

However, the chance for adverse selection (whereby mostly those people most 
likely to be affected take this insurance) at issuance stage is quite high and it is 
important to determine health status of the proposers. Due to lack of sufficient 
data, currently pricing of critical illness plans is being supported through 
reinsurers‟ data. 

c) Critical illnesses are major illnesses that could not only lead to very high 
hospitalization costs, but could also cause disability, loss of limbs, loss of 
earning etc. and may require prolonged care post hospitalization. 

d) A critical illness policy is often recommended to be taken in addition to 
a hospital indemnity policy, so that the compensation under the policy 
could help in overcoming the financial burden of a family whose member 
is affected by such illness. 

e) The critical illnesses covered vary across insurers and products, but the 
common ones include: 
 Cancers of specified severity 
 Acute myocardial infarction 
 Coronary artery surgery 
 Heart valve replacement 
 Coma of specified severity 
 Renal failure 
 Stroke resulting in permanent symptoms 
 
Major organ / bone marrow transplant 

 Multiple sclerosis
364 
 Motor Neuron disease 
 Permanent paralysis of limbs 
 Permanent disability due to major accidents 

The list of critical illnesses is not static and keeps evolving. In a few 
international 
markets 
insurers 
classify 
conditions 
into 
„core‟ 
and 
„additional‟, even covering conditions like Alzheimer‟s disease. Sometimes 
„terminal illness‟ is also included for coverage though premium would 
obviously be very high. 

f) While most critical illness policies provide for a lump sum payment on 
diagnosis of illness, there are a few policies which provide 
hospitalization expenses cover only in the form of reimbursement of 
expenses. Few products offer combination of both covers i.e. indemnity 
for in patient hospitalization expenses and lump sum payment upon 
diagnosis of major diseases named in the policy. 

g) Critical illness policies are usually available for persons in the age group 
of 21 years to 65 years. 

h) The sum insured offered under these policies is quite high as the primary 
reason of such a policy would be to provide for the financial burden of 
long term care associated with such diseases. 

i) Under these policies generally 100% of the sum insured is paid on 
diagnosis of a critical illness. In some cases compensation could vary 
from 25% to 100% of sum insured depending on the policy terms and 
conditions and severity of illness. 

j) A standard condition seen in all critical illness policies is the waiting 
period of 90 days from inception of policy for any benefit to become 
payable under the policy and the survival clause of 30 days after 
diagnosis of the illness. The survival clause has been included as this 
benefit must not be confused with a “death benefit” but more 
interpreted as a “survival (living) benefit” i.e. the benefit provided to 
overcome the hardships that may follow a critical illness. 

k) Rigorous medical examinations are to be undergone for persons 
especially over 45 years of age who wish to take the critical illness 
policy. Standard exclusions are quite similar to those found in health 
insurance products, failure to seek or follow medical advice, or delaying 
medical treatment in order to dodge the waiting period is also 
specifically excluded. 

l) The insurer may compensate the insured only once for any one or more 
of the covered diseases of the policy or offer multiple payouts but up to 
a certain limited number. The policy terminates, once compensation is 
paid under the policy in respect of any of the insured person.
365 
m) The critical illness policy is also offered to groups especially corporates 
who take policies for their employees. 

G. Long term care insurance 

Today, with increasing life expectancy, the population of aged people in the 
world is going up. With an ageing population, the world over, long term care 
insurance is also gaining importance. Elderly people require long term care and 
also those people suffering from any kind of disability. Long term care means all 
forms of continuing personal or nursing care for people who are unable to look 
after themselves without a degree of support and whose health is not going to 
get better in future. 

There are two types of plans for long term care: 

a) Pre-funded plans which are purchased by healthy insured to take care of 
their future medical expenses and 

b) Immediate need plans which are purchased by a lump sum premium 
when the insured is requiring long term care. 

The severity of disability (and expected survival period) decides the quantum of 
benefit. Long term care products are yet to be developed in Indian market. 

Bhavishya Arogya policy 

The first pre-funded insurance plan was the Bhavishya Arogya policy marketed 
by the four public sector general insurance companies. Introduced in the year 
1990, the policy is basically meant to take care of the healthcare needs of an 
insured person after his retirement, while he pays premium during his 
productive life. It is similar to taking a life insurance policy except that it 
covers future medical expenses rather than death. 

a) Deferred Mediclaim 

The policy is a sort of deferred or future Mediclaim policy and provides 
cover similar to the Mediclaim policy. The proposer can join the scheme any 
time between the age of 25 and 55 years. 

b) Retirement age 

He can choose a retirement age between 55 and 60 years with a condition 
that there should be a clear gap of 4 years between the date of joining and 
the retirement age chosen. The policy retirement age means the age 
selected by the insured at the time of signing the proposal and specified in 
the schedule for the purpose of start of benefit under the policy. This age 
cannot be advanced.
366 
c) Pre-retirement period 

The pre-retirement period means the period starting from the date of 
acceptance of the proposal and ending with the policy retirement age 
specified in the schedule. During this period the insured shall be paying 
installment/single premium amount as applicable. The insured has the 
option of paying either one lump-sum premium or in installments. 

d) Withdrawal