I. Policy schedule 
II. Standard provisions 
III. Specific policy provisions 
IV. Claim procedure 

Question 9 

In a standard insurance policy document, the standard provisions section will 
have information on which of the below? 

I. Date of commencement, date of maturity and due date of last premium 
II. Name of nominee 
III. The rights and privileges and other conditions, which are applicable under 
the contract 
IV. The signature of the authorised signatory and policy stamp 

Question 10 

“A clause precluding death due to pregnancy for a lady who is expecting at the 
time of writing the contract” will be included in which section of a standard 
policy document? 

I. Policy schedule 
II. General provisions 
III. Standard provisions 
IV. Specific policy provisions
244 

Answers to Self-Examination Questions 

Answer 1 

The correct option is II. 

Policy document is an evidence of the contract between insurer and insured. 

Answer 2 

The correct option is I. 

If there is complex language used to word a certain policy document and it has 
given rise to an ambiguity, it generally will be construed in favour of the 
insured. 

Answer 3 

The correct option is I. 

Policy document is an evidence of the insurance contract. 

Answer 4 

The correct option is III. 

The First Premium Receipt is the evidence that the policy contract has begun. 

Answer 5 

The correct option is IV. 

For the subsequent premiums received by the insurance company after the first 
premium, the company will issue renewal premium receipt. 

Answer 6 

The correct option is I. 

If the insured person loses the original life insurance policy document, the 
insurance company will issue a duplicate policy without making any changes to 
the contract.
245 
Answer 7 

The correct option is II. 

The policy document has to be signed by a competent authority and should be 
stamped according to the Indian Stamp Act. 

Answer 8 

The correct option is I. 

Policy schedule forms the first part of a standard insurance policy document. 

Answer 9 

The correct option is III. 

The standard provisions section of an insurance policy document will have 
information on the rights and privileges and other conditions, which are 
applicable under the contract. 

Answer 10 

The correct option is IV. 

“A clause precluding death due to pregnancy for a lady who is expecting at the 
time of writing the contract” will be included in specific policy provisions 
section of a standard policy document.
246 
CHAPTER 14 

DOCUMENTATION - POLICY CONDITION - II 

Chapter Introduction 

In this chapter we discuss the provisions incorporated in a policy document. The 
provisions discussed in the chapter include some important provisions related to 
grace period, policy lapse and non-forfeiture etc. 

Learning Outcomes 

A. Policy conditions and privileges
247 

B. Policy conditions and privileges 

1. Grace period 

Every life insurance contract undertakes to pay the death benefit on the 
condition that the premiums have been paid up to date and the policy is in 
force. The “Grace Period” clause grants the policyholder an additional period of 
time to pay the premium after it has become due. 

Important 

The standard length of the grace period is one month or 31 days. The days of 
grace may be computed from the next day after the due date fixed for payment 
of the premium. The provision enables a policy that would otherwise have 
lapsed for non-payment of premium, to continue in force during the grace 
period. 

The premium however remains due and if the policyholder dies during this 
period, the insurer may deduct the premium from the death benefit. If 
premiums remain unpaid even after the grace period is over, the policy would 
then be considered lapsed and the company is not under obligation to pay the 
death benefit. The only amount payable would be whatever is applicable under 
the non-forfeiture provisions. In a sense the insured may thus be said to have 
received free insurance during the grace period. 

2. Lapse and Reinstatement / Revival 

We have already seen that a policy may be said to be in lapse condition if 
premium has not been paid even during the days of grace. The good news is 
that practically all the permanent life insurance contracts permit reinstatement 
(revival) of a lapsed policy. 

Definition 

Reinstatement is the process by which a life insurance company puts back into 
force a policy that has either been terminated because of non-payment of 
premiums or has been continued under one of the non-forfeiture provisions. 

A revival of the policy cannot however be an unconditional right of the insured. 
It can be accomplished only under certain conditions: 

i. 
No increase in risk for insurer: Revival of a policy cannot result in an 
increase in risk for the insurance company
248 
ii. Creation of reserve: The policyholder must pay such amount of 
premiums with interest, as would lead to creation of the same reserve it 
would have accumulated if the policy had not lapsed. 

iii. Revival application within specific time period: The policy owner must 
complete the revival application within the time frame stated in the 
provision for such reinstatement. In India revival must be affected within 
a specific time period, say five years, from the date of lapse. 

iv. Satisfactory evidence of continued insurability: The insured must 
present to the insurance company satisfactory evidence of continued 
insurability of the insured. Not only must her health be satisfactory but 
other factors such as financial income and morals must not have 
deteriorated substantially. 

v. Payment of overdue premiums with interest: The policy owner is 
required to make payment of all overdue premiums with interest from 
due date of each premium. 

vi. Payment of outstanding loan: The insured must also pay any 
outstanding policy loan or reinstate any indebtedness that may have 
existed. 

Perhaps the most significant of the above conditions is that which requires 
evidence of insurability at revival. The type of evidence called for would 
depend on the circumstances of each individual policy. If the policy has been in 
a lapsed state for a very short period of time, the insurer may reinstate the 
policy without any evidence of insurability or may only require a simple 
statement from the insured certifying that he is in good health. 

The company may however require a medical examination or other evidence of 
insurability under certain circumstances: 

i. One is where the grace period has expired since long and the policy is in 
a lapsed condition for say, nearly a year. 

ii. Another situation is where the insurer has reason to suspect that a 
health or other problem may be present. Fresh medical examination may 
also be required if the sum assured or face amount of the policy is large. 

Since a revival may require the policyholder to pay a sizeable sum of money 
(past arrears of premium and interest) for the purpose, each policyholder must 
decide whether it would be more advantageous to revive the original policy or 
purchase a new policy. Revival is often more advantageous because buying a 
new policy would call for a higher premium rate based on the age the 
insured has attained on date of revival.
249 
a) Policy revival measures 

Let us now look at some of the ways through which policy revival can be 
accomplished. In general one can revive a lapsed policy if the revival is 
within a certain period (say 5 years) from the date of first unpaid premium. 

i. 
Ordinary revival 

The simplest form of revival is one that involves payment of arrears of 
premium with interest. This has been termed as ordinary revival and is 
affected when the policy has acquired surrender value. The insurer would 
also call for a declaration of good health or some other evidence of 
insurability like a medical examination. 

ii. Special revival 

What do we do when the policy has run for less than three years and has not 
acquired minimum surrender value (i.e. the accumulated reserves or cash 
value is insignificant) but the period of lapse is large?, say the policy is 
coming up for revival after a period of one year or more since the date of 
first unpaid premium. 

One way to revive it is through a scheme known as special revival (which is 
for instance prevalent in LIC of India). Here it is as though a new policy has 
been written, whose date of commencement is within two years of the 
original date of commencement of the lapsed policy. The maturity date shall 
not exceed the original stipulated period as applicable to certain lives at the 
time of taking the policy. 

Example 

If the original policy was taken at age 40 and the new date of 
commencement is at age 42, the term of the policy may now be reduced 
from twenty to eighteen for those policies that require that the term should 
end at age 60. Difference between old and new premium with interest 
thereon has to be paid. 

iii. Loan cum revival 

Yet a third approach to revival also available with LIC and other companies 
is that of loan cum revival. This is not a revival alone but involves two 
transactions: 
 the simultaneous granting of a loan and 
 revival of the policy 

Arrears of premium and interest are calculated as under ordinary revival. 
The loan that one is eligible to get under the policy as on date of revival is
250 
also determined. This loan may be utilised as consideration amount for 
revival purposes. If there is any balance amount subsisting after loan 
adjustment towards arrears of premium and interest, it is payable to the 
policyholder. Obviously, the facility of loan cum revival would be allowed 
only for policies that have acquired surrender value as on date of revival. 

iv. Instalment revival 

Finally we have instalment revival which is allowed when the policyholder is 
not in a position to pay arrears of premium in a lump sum and neither can 
the policy be revived under special revival scheme. The arrears of premium 
in such case would be calculated in the usual manner as under an ordinary 
revival scheme. 

Depending on the mode of payment (quarterly or half yearly) the life 
assured may be required to pay one half yearly or two quarterly premiums. 
The balance of arrears to be paid would then be spread so as to be paid with 
future premiums on premium due dates, during a period of two years or 
more, including the current policy anniversary year and two full policy 
anniversaries thereafter. A condition may be imposed that there should be 
no outstanding loan under the policy at the time of revival. 

Important 

Revival of lapsed policies is an important service function that life insurers 
seek to actively encourage since policies in lapsed state may do little good 
to either insurer or policyholder. 

3. Non-forfeiture provisions 

One of the important provisions under the Indian Insurance Act (Section 113) 
was that which allowed for accrual of certain benefits to policyholders even 
when they are unable to keep their policies in full force by payment of further 
premiums. The logic, which applies here, is that the policyholder has a claim to 
the cash value accumulated under the policy. 

The law in India thus provided that if premiums have been paid for at least 
three consecutive years there shall be a guaranteed surrender value. 
Recently this provision is amended saying it (GSV) will be specified by R 
egulations. If the policy has not been surrendered it shall subsist as a policy 
with a reduced paid up value. The policy provisions usually provide for a more 
liberal surrender value than that required by law. 

a) Surrender values 

Life insurers normally have a chart that lists the surrender values at various 
times and also the method that will be used for calculating the surrender 
values. The formula takes into account the type and plan of insurance, age
251 
of the policy and the length of the policy premium-paying period. The actual 
amount of cash one gets in hand on surrender may be different from the 
surrender value amount prescribed in the policy. 

This is because paid up additions, bonuses or dividend accumulations, 
advance premium payments or gaps in premiums, policy loans etc. may 
result in additions or subtractions from the cash surrender value accrued. 
What the policyholder ultimately receives is a net surrender value. 
Surrender Value is a percentage of paid-up value. 

Surrender Value arrived as a percentage of premiums paid is called 
Guaranteed Surrender Value. 

b) Policy loans 

Life insurance policies that accumulate a cash value also have a provision to 
grant the policyholder the right to borrow money from the insurer by using 
the cash value of the policy as a security for the loan. The policy loan is 
usually limited to a percentage of the policy‟s surrender value (say 90%). 
Note that the policyholder borrows from his own account. He or she would 
have been eligible to get the amount if the policy had been surrendered. 

In that case however the insurance would also have been terminated. By 
instead taking a loan on the policy, a policyholder is able to keep the cake 
and eat it too. A loan provides access to liquid funds while keeping the 
insurance alive. A loan is what you would recommend to a client in need of 
urgent funds but you would like to keep him or her as your client. 

A policy loan is different from an ordinary commercial loan in two respects: 

Policy loan 
Commercial loan 
No legal obligation to repay the loan: 
The policy owner is not legally obligated to 
repay the loan. She can repay all or part of the 
loan at any time she chooses. If the loan has 
not been repaid, the insurer deducts the 
amount of outstanding (unpaid) loan and 
interest from the policy benefit that is payable. 
A commercial loan creates 
a 
debtor 
– 
creditor 
relationship in which the 
borrower 
is 
legally 
obligated to repay the 
lender. 
No credit check is required: 
Since the insurer does not really lend its own 
funds to the policyholder, it is not necessary to 
perform a credit check on the debtor when the 
latter applies for the loan. The insurer needs to 
only ensure that the loan does not exceed the 
eligible amount (90% of SV as suggested above). 
The 
creditor 
does 
a 
thorough credit check on 
the debtor 

The insurer of course, reserves the right to decide on terms and conditions 
of such loans from time to time as a matter of policy. Since the loan is 
granted on the policy being kept as security, the policy has to be assigned in 
favour of the insurer. Where the policyholder has nominated someone to
252 
receive the money in the event of death of the insured, this nomination 
shall not be cancelled by the subsequent assignment of the policy. 

The nominee‟s right will affected to the extent of the insurer‟s interest in 
the policy. 

Example 

Arjun bought a life insurance policy wherein the total death claim payable 
under the policy was Rs. 2.5 lakhs. Arjun‟s total outstanding loan and 
interest under the policy amounts to Rs. 1.5 lakhs 

Hence in the event of Arjun‟s death, the nominee will be eligible to get the 
balance of Rs. 1 lakh 

Insurers usually charge interest on policy loans, which are payable semi-
annually or annually. If the interest charges are not paid they become part of 
the policy loan and are included in the loan outstanding. 

So long as the premiums are paid in time and the policy is in force, the 
accumulated cash value will generally be more than sufficient to pay for the 
loan and interest charges. But if the policy is in a lapsed condition and no 
new premiums are forthcoming a situation can arise where the amount of 
outstanding loan plus unpaid interest (the total debt) becomes greater than 
the amount of policy‟s cash value. 

The insurer obviously cannot allow such a situation. Well before such an 
eventuality, insurers generally take what is termed as foreclosure action. Notice 
is to be given to the policyholder before the insurance company resorts to 
foreclosure. The policy is terminated and subsisting cash value is adjusted to 
loan and interest that is outstanding. Any excess amount may be paid to the 
policyholder. 

4. Special policy provisions and endorsements 

a) Nomination 

i. Nomination is where the life assured proposes the name of the 
person(s) to whom the sum assured should be paid by the insurance 
company after their death. 
ii. The life assured can nominate one or more than one person as 
nominees. 
iii. Nominees are entitled for valid discharge and have to hold the 
money as a trustee on behalf of those entitled to it. 
iv. Nomination can be done either at the time the policy is bought or 
later. 
v. Under Section39 of the Insurance Act 1938, the holder of a policy on 
their own life may nominate the person or persons to whom the
253 
money secured by the policy shall be paid in the event of their 
death. 

Nomination can be changed by making another endorsement in the policy. 

Important 

Nomination only gives the nominee the right to receive the policy monies in 
the event of the death of the life assured. A nominee does not have any 
right to the whole (or part) of the claim. 

Where the nominee is a minor, the policy holder needs to appoint an 
appointee. The appointee needs to sign the policy document to show his or 
her consent to acting as an appointee. The appointees lose their status 
when the nominee reaches majority age. The life assured can change the 
appointee at any time. If no appointee is given, and the nominee is a minor, 
then on the death of the life assured, the death claim is paid to the legal 
heirs of the policyholder. 

Where more than one nominee is appointed, the death claim will be payable 
to them jointly, or to the survivor or survivors. No specific share for each 
nominee can be made. Nominations made after the commencement of the 
policy have to be intimated to the insurers to be effective. 

Diagram 1: Provisions related to nomination 

 As per recent amendment in the Insurance Act, an insurer can accept any 
change or cancellation of a nomination and may charge a fee from the policy 
holder, as specified by the regulations for affecting such changes.
254 
b) Assignment 

The term assignment ordinarily refers to transfer of property by writing as 
distinguished from transfer by delivery. The ownership of property consists 
of various rights in respect of such property, which are vested in one or 
more persons. 

On assignment, nomination is cancelled, except when assignment is 
made to insurance company for a policy loan. 

The assignment of a life insurance policy implies the act of transferring the 
rights right, title and interest in the policy (as property) from one person to 
another. The person who transfers the rights is called assignor and the 
person to whom property is transferred is called assignee. 

Diagram 2: Assignment 

In India assignment is governed by Section 38 of Insurance Act. On execution 
of the assignment the assignee gets all rights title and interest in respect of 
property assigned and becomes the owner of the policy, subject to the 
provision that the assignee cannot have a better title than the assignor. 

This last provision is very important. It means simply that the assignee 
would not be eligible to get a claim that for some reason is rejected to the 
assured. Assignment requires that the parties be competent to contract and 
is not subject to legal disqualifications.
255 
There are two types of assignments. 

Diagram 3: Types of Assignment 

Conditional Assignment 
Absolute Assignment 
Conditional assignment provides 
that the policy shall revert back 
to the life assured on his or her 
surviving the date of maturity or 
on death of the assignee. 
Absolute 
assignment 
provides 
that all rights, title and interest 
which the assignor has in the 
policy are transferred to the 
assignee without reversion to the 
former or his/her estate in any 
event. The policy thus vests 
absolutely with the assignee. The 
latter can deal with the policy in 
whatever manner he or she likes 
without 
the consent of the 
assignor. 

Absolute assignment is more commonly seen in many commercial situations 
where the policy is typically mortgaged against a debt assumed by the 
policyholder, like a housing loan. 

Conditions for valid assignment 

Let us now look at the conditions that are necessary for a valid assignment. 

i. First of all the person executing it (the assignor) must have absolute 
right and title or assignable interest to the policy being assigned. 

ii. Secondly it is necessary that the assignment be supported by valuable 
consideration, which may include love and affection. 

iii. Thirdly it is imperative that the assignment is not opposed to any law in 
force. For example the assignment of a policy to a foreign national 
residing in another country may contravene exchange control 
regulations. 

iv. Assignee can do another assignment, but cannot do nomination 
because assignee is not the life assured.
256 
The assignment has to be in writing and must be signed and attested by at 
least one witness. The fact of transfer of title has to be specifically set forth 
in the form of an endorsement on the policy. It is also necessary that the 
policyholder must give notice of the assignment to the insurer. Unless such 
notice in writing is received by the insurer, the assignee would not have 
any right of title to the policy. 

On receipt of the policy document for endorsement and notice the life 
insurance may affect and register the assignment. It must be noted that 
while registering the assignment the company does not take any 
responsibility or express any opinion about its validity or legal effect. The 
date of the assignment as recorded in the books of the life insurance 
company would be the date on which the assignment and notice thereof has 
been received by its concerned office. If the notice and the assignment 
were to be received on separate dates, the date of the one received later 
will be deemed as the date of registration. 

An assignee may reassign interest in the policy to the policyholder /life 
assured during the currency of the policy. On such reassignment the latter 
may be advised to execute a fresh nomination or assignment for expeditious 
settlement of the claim. Again, in the case of conditional assignment the 
title to the policy would revert to the life assured in the event of death 
of the assignee. On the other hand if the assignment were absolute, the 
title would pass to the estate of the deceased assignee. 

Diagram 4: Provisions related to assignment of insurance policies 

As per recent amendment in the Insurance Act, a life insurance policy 
can be assigned wholly or partially. In case of a partial assignment, liability 
of an insurer shall be limited to the amount secured by partial assignment. 
The policy holder can not further assign the residual amount under the 
policy.
257 
An insurer may accept or refuse the assignment and communicate the 
reasons for refusal within 30 days from the date of notice of assignment by 
the policy holder. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the insurer may 
appeal to the Authority. 

The rights of an assignee existing prior to the current amendment shall 
not be affected by the current provision under section 38. 

Nomination Vs. Assignment 

Basis of Difference 
Nomination 
Assignment 
What is Nomination 
or Assignment? 
Nomination is the 
process of 
appointment of a 
person to receive the 
death claim 
Assignment is the 
process of transferring 
the title of the 
insurance policy to 
another person or 
institution. 
When can the 
nomination or 
assignment be 
done? 
Nomination can be 
done either at the 
time of proposal or 
after the 
commencement of 
the policy. 
Assignment can be done 
only after 
commencement of the 
policy. 
Who can make the 
nomination or 
assignment? 
Nomination can be 
made only by the life-
assured on the policy 
of his own life. 
Assignment can be done 
by owner of the policy 
either by the life 
assured if he is the 
policyholder or the 
assignee 
Where is it 
applicable? 
It is applicable only 
where the Insurance 
Act, 1938 is 
applicable. 
It is applicable all over 
the world, according to 
the law of the 
respective country 
relating to transfer of 
property. 
Does the 
policyholder retain 
control over the 
policy? 
The policyholder 
retains title and 
control over the 
policy and the 
nominee has no right 
to sue under the 
policy 
The policyholder loses 
the right, title and 
interest under the policy 
until a re-assignment is 
executed and the 
assignee has a right to 
sue under the policy. 

Is a witness 
required? 
Witness is not 
required. 
Witness is mandatory. 
Do they get any 
rights? 
Nominee has no rights 
over the policy. 
Assignee gets full rights 
over the policy, and can 
even sue under the 
policy.
258 
Can it be revoked? 
Nomination can be 
revoked or cancelled 
at any time during 
the policy term. 
The assignment once 
done cannot be 
cancelled, but can be 
re-assigned. 
In case of minor: 
In case the nominee 
is a minor, appointee 
has to be appointed. 
In case the assignee is a 
minor, a guardian has to 
be appointed. 
What happens in 
case of the 
nominee‘s or 
assignee‘s death? 
In case of nominee‟s 
death, the rights of 
the policy revert to 
the policyholder or to 
his legal heirs. 
In case of conditional 
assignee‟s death, the 
rights on the policy 
revert back to the life 
assured, based on the 
terms of assignment. In 
case of the absolute 
assignee‟s death, his 
legal heirs are entitled 
to the policy. 
What happens in 
case of death of 
the nominee or 
assignee after the 
death of the life-
assured and before 
the payment of the 
death claim 
In case the nominee 
dies before the 
settlement of death 
claim, the death 
claim will be payable 
to the legal heirs of 
the life assured. 
In case the assignee dies 
before the settlement, 
the policy money is 
payable to the legal 
heirs of the assignee and 
not the life-assured who 
is the assignor. 
Can creditors 
attach the policy? 
Creditors can attach 
the insurance policy 
which has a 
nomination in it. 
Creditors cannot attach 
the policy unless the 
assignment is shown to 
have been made to 
defraud the creditors. 

c) Duplicate Policy 
A life insurance policy document is only an evidence of a promise. Loss or 
destruction of the policy document and does not in any way absolve the 
company of its liability under the contract. Life insurance companies 
generally have standard procedures to be followed in case of loss of the 
policy document. 

Normally the office would examine the case to see if there is any reason to 
doubt the alleged loss. Satisfactory proof may require to be produced that 
the policy has been lost and not been dealt with in any manner. Generally 
the claim may be settled on the claimant furnishing an indemnity bond with 
or without surety. 

If payment is shortly due and the amount to be paid is high, the office may 
also insist that an advertisement be placed in a national paper with wide 
circulation, reporting the loss. A duplicate policy may be issued on being 
sure that there is no objection from anyone else.
259 
d) Alteration 

Policyholders may seek to effect alterations in policy terms and conditions. 
There is provision to make such changes subject to consent of both the 
insurer and assured. Normally alterations may not be permitted during the 
first year of the policy, except for change in the mode of premium or 
alterations which are of a compulsory nature – like 
 change in name or / address; 
 readmission of age in case it is proved higher or lower; 
 request for grant of double accident benefit or permanent disability 
benefit etc. 

Alterations may be permitted in subsequent years. Some of these alterations 
may be affected by placing a suitable endorsement on the policy or on a 
separate paper. Other alterations, which require a material change in policy 
conditions, may require the cancellation of existing policies and issue of 
new policies. 

Some of the main types of alterations that are permitted are 

i. 
Change in certain classes of insurance or term [where risk is not 
increased] 
ii. Reduction in the sum assured 
iii. Change in the mode of payment of premium 
iv. Change in the date of commencement of the policy 
v. Splitting up of the policy into two or more policies 
vi. Removal of an extra premium or restrictive clause 
vii. Change from without profits to with profits plan 
viii. Correction in name 
ix. Settlement option for payment of claim and grant of double accident 
benefit 

These alterations generally do not involve an increase in the risk. There are 
other alterations in policies that are not allowed. These may be alterations 
that have the effect of lowering the premium. Examples are extension of 
the premium paying term; change from with profit to without profit plans; 
change from one class of insurance to another, where it increases the risk: 
and increase in the sum assured. 

Insurance companies everywhere are generally allowed to select the actual 
wording of their policy documents, but these may need to be submitted to 
the regulator for approval.
260 
Test Yourself 1 

Under what circumstances would the policyholder need to appoint an 
appointee? 

I. Insured is minor 
II. Nominee is a minor 
III. Policyholder is not of sound mind 
IV. Policyholder is not married
261 
Summary 

 
The grace period clause grants the policyholder an additional period of time 
to pay the premium after it has become due. 

 
Reinstatement is the process by which a life insurance company puts back 
into force a policy that has either been terminated because of non-payment 
of premiums or has been continued under one of the non-forfeiture 
provisions. 

 
A policy loan is different from an ordinary commercial loan in two respects, 
firstly the policy owner is not legally obligated to repay the loan and the 
insurer need not perform a credit check on the insured. 

 
Nomination is where the life assured proposes the name of the person(s) to 
which the sum assured should be paid by the insurance company after their 
death. 

 
The assignment of a life insurance policy implies the act of transferring the 
rights right, title and interest in the policy (as property) from one person to 
another. The person who transfers the rights is called assignor and the 
person to whom property is transferred is called assignee. 

 
Alteration is subject to consent of both the insurer and assured. Normally 
alterations may not be permitted during the first year of the policy, except 
for some simple ones. 

Key Terms 

1. Grace period 
2. Policy lapse 
3. Policy revival 
4. Surrender value 
5. Nomination 
6. Assignment
262 

Answers to Test Yourself 

Answer 1 

The correct option is II. 

Where the nominee is a minor, the policyholder needs to appoint an appointee. 

Self-Examination Questions 

Question 1 

Which of the below statement is false with regards to nomination? 

I. Policy nomination is not cancelled if the policy is assigned to the insurer in 
return for a loan 
II. Nomination can be done at the time of policy purchase or subsequently 
III. Nomination can be changed by making an endorsement in the policy 
IV. A nominee has full rights on the whole of the claim 

Question 2 

In order for the policy to acquire a guaranteed surrender value, for how long 
must the premiums be paid as per law? 

I. Premiums must be paid for at least 2 consecutive years 
II. Premiums must be paid for at least 3 consecutive years 
III. Premiums must be paid for at least 4 consecutive years 
IV. Premiums must be paid for at least 5 consecutive years 

Question 3 

When is a policy deemed to be lapsed? 

I. If the premiums are not paid on due date 
II. If the premiums are not paid before the due date 
III. If the premium has not been paid even during days of grace 
IV. If the policy is surrendered 

Question 4 

Which of the below statement is correct with regards to grace period of an 
insurance policy? 

I. The standard length of the grace period is one month. 
II. The standard length of the grace period is 30 days. 
III. The standard length of the grace period is one month or 30 days. 
IV. The standard length of the grace period is one month or 31 days.
263 
Question 5 

What will happen if the policyholder does not pay the premium by the due date 
and dies during the grace period? 

I. The insurer will consider the policy void due to non-payment of premium by 
the due date and hence reject the claim 
II. The insurer will pay the claim and waive off the last unpaid premium 
III. The insurer will pay the claim after deducting the unpaid premium 
IV. The insurer will pay the claim after deducting the unpaid premium along 
with interest which will be taken as 2% above the bank savings interest rate 

Question 6 

During the revival of a lapsed policy, which of the below aspect is considered 
most significant by the insurance company? Choose the most appropriate option. 

I. Evidence of insurability at revival 
II. Revival of the policy leading to increase in risk for the insurance company 
III. Payment of unpaid premiums with interest 
IV. Insured submitting the revival application within a specified time frame 

Question 7 

For an insurance policy nomination is allowed under _________ of the Insurance 
Act, 1938. 

I. Section 10 
II. Section 38 
III. Section 39 
IV. Section 45 

Question 8 

Which of the below statement is incorrect with regards to a policy against which 
a loan has been taken from the insurance company? 

I. The policy will have to be assigned in favour of the insurance company 
II. The nomination of such policy will get cancelled due to assignment of the 
policy in favour of the insurance company 
III. The nominee‟s right will affected to the extent of the insurer‟s interest in 
the policy 
IV. The policy loan is usually limited to a percentage of the policy‟s surrender 
value
264 
Question 9 

Which of the below statement is incorrect with regards to assignment of an 
insurance policy? 

I. In case of Absolute Assignment, in the event of death of the assignee, the 
title of the policy would pass to the estate of the deceased assignee. 
II. The assignment of a life insurance policy implies the act of transferring the 
rights right, title and interest in the policy (as property) from one person to 
another. 
III. It is necessary that the policyholder must give notice of assignment to the 
insurer. 
IV. In case of Absolute Assignment, the policy vests absolutely with the assignee 
till maturity, except in case of death of the insured during the policy 
tenure, wherein the policy reverts back to the beneficiaries of the insured. 

Question 10 

Which of the below alteration will be permitted by an insurance company? 

I. Splitting up of the policy into two or more policies 
II. Extension of the premium paying term 
III. Change of the policy from with profit policy to without profit policy 
IV. Increase in the sum assured 

Answers to Self-Examination Questions 

Answer 1 

The correct option is IV. 

A nominee does not have any right to whole (or part) of the claim. 

Answer 2 

The correct option is II. 

In order for the policy to acquire a guaranteed surrender value, premiums must 
be paid for at least 3 consecutive years. 

Answer 3 

The correct option is III. 

If the premium has not been paid even during days of grace, the policy is 
deemed to be lapsed.
265 
Answer 4 

The correct option is IV. 

The standard length of the grace period is one month or 31 days. 

Answer 5 

The correct option is II. 

If the policyholder does not pay the premium by the due date and dies during 
the grace period, the insurer will pay the claim after deducting the unpaid 
premium. 

Answer 6 

The correct option is I. 

During the revival of a lapsed policy, evidence of insurability at revival is 
considered as the most significant aspect by the insurance company. 

Answer 7 

The correct option is III. 

For an insurance policy nomination is allowed under Section 39 of the Insurance 
Act, 1938. 

Answer 8 

The correct option is II. 

Option II is incorrect. 
With regards to a policy against which a loan has been taken from the insurance 
company, the nomination will NOT get cancelled due to assignment of the 
policy in favour of the insurance company. 

Answer 9 

The correct option is IV. 

Option IV is incorrect. 

In case of Absolute Assignment, the policy vests absolutely with the assignee till 
maturity. In the event of death of the insured during the policy tenure, the 
policy will NOT revert back to the beneficiaries of the insured. The assignee will 
be entitled to policy benefits.
266 
Answer 10 

The correct option is I. 

An alteration that involves splitting up of the policy into two or more policies is 
permitted.
267 
CHAPTER 15 

UNDERWRITING 

Chapter Introduction 

A life insurance agent‟s work does not stop once a proposal is secured from a 
prospective customer. The proposal must also be accepted by the insurance 
company and result in a policy. 

Every life insurance proposal indeed has to pass through a gateway where the 
life insurer decides whether to accept the proposal and if so, on what terms. In 
this chapter we shall know more about the process of underwriting and the 
elements involved in the process. 

Learning Outcomes 

A. Underwriting – Basic concepts 
B. Non-medical underwriting 
C. Medical underwriting
268 

A. Underwriting – Basic concepts 

1. Underwriting purpose 

We begin with examining the purpose of underwriting. There are two purposes 

i. To prevent anti-selection or selection against the insurer 
ii. To classify risks and ensure equity among risks 

Definition 

The term selection of risks refers to the process of evaluating each proposal for 
life insurance in terms of the degree of risk it represents and then deciding 
whether or not to grant insurance and on what terms. 

Anti-selection is the tendency of people, who suspect or know that their 
chance of experiencing a loss is high, to seek out insurance eagerly and to gain 
in the process. 

Example 

If life insurers were to be not selective about whom they offered insurance, 
there is a chance that people with serious ailments like heart problems or 
cancer, who did not expect to live long, would seek to buy insurance. 

In other words, if an insurer did not exercise selection it would be selected 
against and suffer losses in the process. 

2. Equity among risks 

Let us now consider equity among risks. The term “Equity” means that 
applicants who are exposed to similar degrees of risk must be placed in the 
same premium class. We have already seen how life insurers use a mortality 
table to determine the premiums to be charged. The table represents the 
mortality experience of standard lives or average risks. They include the vast 
majority of individuals who propose to take life insurance. 

a) Risk classification 

To usher equity, the underwriter engages in a process known as risk 
classification i.e. individual lives are categorised and assigned to different 
risk classes depending on the degree of risks they pose. There are four such 
risk classes.
269