State Commission would handle consumer disputes amounting between Rs. 20 
lakhs and Rs. 100 lakhs. 

Answer 3 

The correct option is II. 

Shopkeeper not advising the customer on the best product in a category cannot 
form the basis of a valid consumer complaint. 

Answer 4 

The correct option is III. 

Complaint is to be lodged with the Insurance Ombudsman under whose 
territorial jurisdiction the insurer‟s office falls. 

Answer 5 

The correct option is IV.
69 

Insurance Ombudsman operates only within the specified territorial limits. 

Answer 6 

The correct option is I. 

The complaint to the ombudsman is to be made in writing. 

Answer 7 

The correct option is III. 

The complainant must approach the ombudsman within one year of rejection of 
the complaint by the insurer. 

Answer 8 

The correct option is III. 

Complainant need not approach a consumer forum prior to the Ombudsman. 

Answer 9 

The correct option is II. 

No fee / charges need to be paid for lodging the complaint with the 
Ombudsman. 

Answer 10 

The correct option is II. 

Yes, a complaint can be launched against private insurers.
70 

CHAPTER 4 

REGULATORY ASPECTS OF INSURANCE AGENTS 
Chapter Introduction 

In this chapter, we discuss Regulatory aspects of Insurance agents. 

Learning Outcomes 

A. Regulations of Insurance Agents
71 

A. Regulations of Insurance Agents 

Appointment of Insurance Agent regulations came into force with effect from 1st 
April 2016. 
The following definitions are relevant. 
1. Definitions: 
1) “Act” means the Insurance Act, 1938 (4 of 1938) as amended from time 
to time. 
2) “Appointment Letter” means a letter of appointment issued by an 
insurer to any person to act as an insurance agent. 
3) “Appellate Officer” means an officer authorised by the Insurer to 
consider and dispose representations and appeals received from an 
Insurance Agent. 
4) "Insurance Agent" means an individual appointed by an insurer for the 
purpose of soliciting or procuring insurance business including business 
relating to the continuance, renewal or revival of policies of insurance. 
5) “Authority” means the Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority 
of India established under the provisions of Section 3 of the Insurance 
Regulatory and Development Authority Act, 1999 (41 of 1999). 
6) “Composite Insurance Agent” means an individual who is appointed as an 
insurance agent by two or more insurers subject to the condition that 
he/she shall not act as insurance agent for more than one life insurer, 
one general insurer, one health insurer and one each of the mono-line 
insurers. 
7) “Centralised list of Agents” means a list of agents maintained by the 
Authority, which contains all details of agents appointed by all insurers. 
8) “Centralised list of black listed agents” means list of agents maintained 
by the Authority whose appointment is cancelled/suspended by a 
designated official of insurer on grounds of violation of code of conduct 
and / or fraud. 
9) “Designated Official” means an officer authorised by the Insurer to make 
Appointment of an individual as an Insurance Agent. 
10) “Examination Body” means an Institution, which conducts pre-
recruitment tests for insurance agents and which is duly recognised by 
the Authority. 
11) “Mono-Line Insurer” for the purpose of these Regulations means insurer 
as defined under section 2(9) of Insurance Act, 1938 and carrying on one 
particular specialized line of business such as agriculture insurance, 
export credit guarantee business. 
12) “Multilevel Marketing Scheme” means any scheme as defined in 
explanation to Section 42A of the Act.
72 

2. Appointment of Insurance Agent by the Insurer: 
1) An applicant seeking appointment as an insurance agent of an Insurer 
shall submit an application in Form I-A to the Designated Official of the 
Insurer. 

2) The Designated Official of the insurer, on receipt of the application, 
shall satisfy himself that the applicant:- 
a) Has furnished the Agency Application in Form I-A complete in all 
respects; 
b) Has submitted the PAN details along with the Agency Application 
Form; 
c) Has passed the insurance examination as specified under Regulations 
6; 
d) Does not suffer from any of the disqualifications mentioned in 
Regulation 7; 
e) Has the requisite knowledge to solicit and procure insurance 
business; and capable of providing the necessary service to the policy 
holders; 

3) The Designated Official shall exercise due diligence in verifying the 
agency application and ascertaining that the applicant does not hold 
agency appointment for more than one life insurer, one general insurer, 
one health insurer and one each of the mono-line insurers and is not in 
the centralised list of blacklisted agents. 

4) The Designated Official shall also verify 
a) The centralised list of agents maintained by the Authority with the 
PAN Number of the applicant to ascertain the information as stated 
above. 
b) The centralised list of black listed agents maintained by the Authority 
to ascertain that the applicant is not black listed. 
5) The Designated Official on satisfying himself that the applicant has 
complied with all the conditions mentioned in Regulation above, and 
also does not suffer from any of the disqualifications mentioned in sub-
section (3) of Section 42 of the Act, may process the agency application 
and grant appointment to the applicant as an insurance agent by issuing 
an appointment letter within 15 days of receipt of all documents from 
the applicant. The Designated Official shall allot an agency code number 
to the appointed agent and the agency code number shall be prefixed by 
the abbreviation of the insurer‟s name. 

6) The agency appointment letter issued as mentioned above shall lay down 
the terms of appointment covering all conditions governing appointment 
and functioning of the applicant as insurance agent and the code of 
conduct as stated below. The letter of appointment shall be dispatched
73 
not later than 7 days after the appointment of the agent as mentioned 
above. 

7) The applicant so appointed as an insurance agent shall be provided an 
identity card, by the insurer which shall identify the agent with the 
insurer whom he/she is representing as an agent. 

8) The Designated Official may refuse to grant Agency Appointment to any 
applicant if the applicant does not fulfil any of the conditions mentioned 
in these Regulations. The Designated Official shall communicate the 
reasons for refusal for appointment as agent to the applicant in writing, 
within 21 days of receipt of the application. 

9) An applicant who is aggrieved by the decision of the Designated Official 
refusing to grant the agency appointment may submit a review 
application to the appellate officer designated by the insurer for review 
of the decision. The insurer shall designate an Appellate Officer to 
consider the review application of the applicant. The Appellate Officer 
shall consider the application and communicate the final decision in 
writing within 15 days of receipt of the review application. 

3. Appointment of Composite Insurance Agent by the insurer: 
1) An applicant seeking appointment as a „Composite Insurance Agent‟ shall 
make an application to the Designated Official of respective life, 
general, health insurer or mono-line insurer as the case may be, in the 
„Composite Agency Application Form I-B. The Designated Official of the 
respective insurers shall deal with the application in the manner and 
procedure outlined above. 

4. Insurance Agency Examination:— 
1) An applicant shall pass in the Insurance Agency Examination conducted 
by the Examination Body in the subjects of Life, General, or Health 
Insurance as the case may be, as per the syllabus prescribed by the 
Authority to be eligible for appointment as an insurance agent. The 
insurer shall provide the necessary assistance and guidance to the 
candidates to equip them with adequate insurance knowledge required 
to qualify in the agency examination. 

2) The applicant who has successfully passed the Insurance Agency 
Examination as mentioned in above shall be issued a pass certificate by 
the Examination Body. The pass certificate issued by the Examining Body 
shall be in force for a period of twelve months, for the purpose of 
seeking appointment as an agent with any insurer for the first time. 

3) Only candidates who have qualified in the Insurance Agency Examination 
as mentioned above and who hold a valid pass certificate issued by the
74 
Examination Body shall be eligible to be considered for appointment as 
agents. 

5. Disqualification to act as an Insurance Agent: The conditions for 
disqualification shall be as stipulated under Section 42 (3) of the Act. 

6. Code of Conduct. 

1) Every agent shall adhere to the code of conduct specified below:- 
a) Every insurance agent shall, --- 
i. 
Identify himself and the insurer of whom he is an insurance 
agent; 
ii. 
Show the agency identity card to the prospect, and also disclose 
the agency appointment letter to the prospect on demand; 
iii. 
Disseminate the requisite information in respect of insurance 
products offered for sale by his insurer and take into account the 
needs of the prospect while recommending a specific insurance 
plan; 
iv. 
Where the Insurance agent represents more than one insurer 
offering same line of products, he should dispassionately advice 
the policyholder on the products of all Insurers whom he is 
representing and the product best suited to the specific needs of 
the prospect; 
v. 
Disclose the scales of commission in respect of the insurance 
product offered for sale, if asked by the prospect; 
vi. 
Indicate the premium to be charged by the insurer for the 
insurance product offered for sale; 
vii. 
Explain to the prospect the nature of information required in the 
proposal form by the insurer, and also the importance of 
disclosure of material information in the purchase of an insurance 
contract; 
viii. 
Bring to the notice of the insurer every fact about the prospect 
relevant to insurance underwriting, including any adverse habits 
or income inconsistency of the prospect, within the knowledge of 
the agent, in the form of a report called “Insurance Agent‟s 
Confidential Report” along with every proposal submitted to the 
insurer wherever applicable, and any material fact that may 
adversely affect the underwriting decision of the insurer as 
regards acceptance of the proposal, by making all reasonable 
enquiries about the prospect; 
ix. 
Obtain the requisite documents at the time of filing the proposal 
form with the insurer; and other documents subsequently asked 
for by the insurer for completion of the proposal; 
x. 
Advise every prospect to effect nomination under the policy 
xi. 
Inform promptly the prospect about the acceptance or rejection 
of the proposal by the insurer;
75 
xii. 
Render necessary assistance and advice to every policyholder 
introduced through him/her on all policy servicing matters 
including assignment of policy, change of address or exercise of 
options under the policy or any other policy service, wherever 
necessary; 
xiii. 
Render necessary assistance to the policyholders or claimants or 
beneficiaries in complying with the requirements for settlement 
of claims by the insurer; 

2) No insurance agent shall, ---- 
a. Solicit or procure insurance business without being appointed to act 
as such by the insurer 
b. Induce the prospect to omit any material information in the proposal 
form; 
c. Induce the prospect to submit wrong information in the proposal 
form or documents submitted to the insurer for acceptance of the 
proposal; 
d. Resort to multilevel marketing for soliciting and procuring insurance 
policies and/or induct any prospect/policyholder into a multilevel 
level marketing scheme. 
e. Behave in a discourteous manner with the prospect; 
f. Interfere with any proposal introduced by any other insurance agent; 
g. Offer different rates, advantages, terms and conditions other than 
those offered by his insurer; 
h. Demand or receive a share of proceeds from the beneficiary under an 
insurance contract; 
i. Force a policyholder to terminate the existing policy and to effect a 
new policy from him within three years from the date of such 
termination of the earlier policy; 
j. Apply for fresh agency appointment to act as an insurance agent, if 
his agency appointment was earlier cancelled by the designated 
official, and a period of five years has not elapsed from the date of 
such cancellation; 
k. Become or remain a director of any insurer; 

3) Every insurance agent shall, with a view to conserve the insurance 
business already procured through him, make every attempt to ensure 
remittance of the premiums by the policyholders within the stipulated 
time, by giving notice to the policyholder orally and in writing; 

4) Any person who acts as an insurance agent in contravention of the 
provisions of the Insurance Act, 1938 and Regulations made there under 
shall be liable to a penalty which may extend to ten thousand rupees 
and any insurer or any person acting on behalf of an insurer, who 
appoints any person as an insurance agent not permitted to act as such 
or transact any insurance business in India through any such person shall 
be liable to penalty which may extend to one crore rupees.
76 

5) The insurer shall be responsible for all acts and omissions of its agents 
including violation of code of conduct specified under these Regulations, 
and shall be liable to a penalty which may extend to one crore rupees. 

7. Suspension of Appointment of an Agent: 
1) The appointment of an agent may be cancelled or suspended after due 
notice and after giving him/her a reasonable opportunity of being heard 
if he/she:- 
a. Violates the provisions of the Insurance Act,1938 (4 of 1938), 
Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority Act, 1999 (41 of 
1999) or rules or regulations, made there under as amended from 
time to time; 
b. Attracts any of the disqualifications mentioned above. 
c. Fails to comply with the code of conduct stipulated in Regulation 8 
and directions issued by the Authority from time to time. 
d. Violates terms of appointment. 
e. Fails to furnish any information relating to his/her activities as an 
agent as required by the Insurer or the Authority; 
f. Fails to comply with the directions issued by the Authority; 
g. Furnishes wrong or false information; or conceals or fails to disclose 
material facts in the application submitted for appointment of 
Insurance Agent or during the period of its validity. 
h. Does 
not 
submit 
periodical 
returns 
as 
required 
by 
the 
Insurer/Authority; 
i. Does not co-operate with any inspection or enquiry conducted by the 
Authority; 
j. Fails to resolve the complaints of the policyholders or fails to give a 
satisfactory reply to the Authority in this behalf; 
k. Either directly or indirectly involves in embezzlement of premiums / 
cash collected from policyholders/prospects on behalf of insurer. 
However this proviso does not permit an agent to collect 
cash/premium without specific authorisation by the insurer. 

8. Procedure for Cancellation of Agency: 
On the issue of the final order for cancellation of agency of the insurance agent, 
he/she shall cease to act as an insurance agent from the date of the final order. 

9. Effect of suspension/cancellation of Agency appointment.— 
1) On and from the date of suspension or cancellation of the agency, the 
insurance Agent, shall cease to act as an insurance agent. 
a. The insurer shall recover the appointment letter and Identity card 
from the agent whose appointment has been cancelled under these 
Regulations within 7 days of issuance of final order effecting 
cancellation of appointment. 
b. The insurer shall black list the agent and enter the details of the 
agent whose appointment is suspended/cancelled into the black
77 
listed agents' database maintained by the Authority and the 
centralised list of Agents database maintained by the Authority, in 
online mode, immediately after issuance of the order effecting 
suspension/ cancellation. 
c. In case a suspension is revoked in respect of any agent on conclusion 
of disciplinary action by way of issuance of a speaking order by 
Designated Official, the details of such agent shall be removed from 
list of black listed Agents as soon as the Speaking Order revoking 
his/her suspension is issued. 
d. The insurer shall also inform other insurers, Life or General or Health 
Insurer or mono-line insurer with whom he/she is acting as an agent, 
of the action taken against the Insurance Agent for their records and 
necessary action. 

10. Procedure to be followed in respect of resignation/surrender of 
appointment by an insurance agent: 
1) In case an insurance agent appointed by an insurer wishes to surrender 
his agency with his/her insurer, he/she shall surrender his appointment 
letter and identity card to the designated official of the insurer with 
whom he/she is currently holding agency. 
2) The Insurer shall issue the cessation certificate as detailed in Form I-C 
within a period of 15 days from the date of resignation or surrender of 
appointment. 
3) An Insurance Agent who has surrendered his appointment may seek fresh 
appointment with other insurer. In such a case, the agent has to furnish 
to the new insurer all the details of his/her previous agency and produce 
Cessation Certificate issued by the previous insurer issued in Form I-C, 
along with his agency application form. 
4) The insurer will consider the agency application as outlined above after 
a period of NINETY DAYS from the date of the issue of the cessation 
certificate by the previous insurer. 

11. General conditions for appointment of Agents by the insurer: 
1) The Insurer shall frame a „Board Approved Policy‟ covering Agency 
Matters and file the same with the Authority before 31st March every 
year. The guidelines for the „Board Approved Policy‟ to be framed by the 
Insurer 
2) No individual shall act as an insurance agent for more than one life 
insurer, one general insurer, one health insurer and one each of mono-
line insurers 
3) Any individual, who acts as an insurance agent in contravention of the 
provisions of this Act, shall be liable to a penalty which may extend to 
ten thousand rupees. 
4) Any insurer or any representative of the insurer acting on behalf of the 
insurer, who appoints an individual as an insurance agent not permitted 
to act as such or transact any insurance business in India shall be liable 
to penalty which may extend to one crore rupees.
78 
5) No insurer shall, on or after the commencement of the Insurance Laws 
(Amendment) Act, 2015 appoint any Principal Agent, Chief Agent, and 
Special Agent and transact any insurance business in India through them. 
6) No person shall allow or offer to allow, either directly or indirectly or as 
an inducement, to any person to take out or renew or continue an 
insurance policy through multilevel marketing scheme. 
7) The Authority may through an officer authorized in this behalf, make a 
complaint to the appropriate police authorities relating to the entity or 
persons involved in the Multi-Level Marketing schemes. 
8) Every insurer and every Designated Official who is acting on behalf of an 
insurer in appointing insurance agents shall maintain a register showing 
the name and address of every insurance agent appointed by him and 
the date on which his appointment began and the date, if any, on which 
his appointment ceased. 
9) The records as mentioned above shall be maintained by the insurer as 
long as the insurance agent is in service and for a period of five years 
from the cessation of the appointment.
79 

CHAPTER 5 

LEGAL PRINCIPLES OF AN INSURANCE CONTRACT 
Chapter Introduction 

In this chapter, we discuss the elements that govern the working of an insurance 
contract. The chapter also deals with the special features of an insurance 
contract. 

Learning Outcomes 

A. Insurance contracts – Legal aspects and special features
80 

A. Insurance contracts – Legal aspects and special features 

1. Insurance contracts – Legal aspects 

a) The insurance contract 

Insurance involves a contractual agreement in which the insurer agrees to 
provide financial protection against certain specified risks for a price or 
consideration known as the premium. The contractual agreement takes the 
form of an insurance policy. 

b) Legal aspects of an insurance contract 

We will now look at some features of an insurance contract and then consider 
the legal principles that govern insurance contracts in general. 

Important 

A contract is an agreement between parties, enforceable at law. The provisions 
of the Indian Contract Act, 1872 govern all contracts in India, including 
insurance contracts. 

An insurance policy is a contract entered into between two parties, viz., the 
company, called the insurer, and the policy holder, called the insured and 
fulfils the requirements enshrined in the Indian Contract Act, 1872. 

Diagram 1: Insurance contract
81 
c) Elements of a valid contract 

Diagram 2: Elements of a valid contract 

The elements of a valid contract are: 

i. Offer and acceptance 

When one person signifies to another his willingness to do or to abstain from 
doing anything with a view to obtaining the assent of the other to such act, 
he is said to make an offer or proposal. Usually, the offer is made by the 
proposer, and acceptance made by the insurer. 

When a person to whom the offer is made signifies his assent thereto, this is 
deemed to be an acceptance. Hence, when a proposal is accepted, it 
becomes a promise. 

The acceptance needs to be communicated to the proposer which results in 
the formation of a contract. 

When a proposer accepts the terms of the insurance plan and signifies his 
assent by paying the deposit amount, which, on acceptance of the proposal, 
gets converted to the first premium, the proposal becomes a policy. 

If any condition is put, it becomes a counter offer. 

The policy bond becomes the evidence of the contract. 

ii. Consideration 
This means that the contract must contain some mutual benefit for the 
parties. The premium is the consideration from the insured, and the promise 
to indemnify, is the consideration from the insurers.
82 

iii. Agreement between the parties 

Both the parties should agree to the same thing in the same sense. In other 
words, there should be “consensus ad-idem” between both parties. Both 
the insurance company and the policyholder must agree on the same thing in 
the same sense. 

iv. Free consent 

There should be free consent while entering into a contract. 

Consent is said to be free when it is not caused by 

 Coercion 
 Undue influence 
 Fraud 
 Misrepresentation 
 Mistake 

When consent to an agreement is caused by coercion, fraud or 
misrepresentation, the agreement is voidable. 

v. Capacity of the parties 

Both the parties to the contract must be legally competent to enter into the 
contract. The policyholder must have attained the age of majority at the 
time of signing the proposal and should be of sound mind and not 
disqualified under law. For example, minors cannot enter into insurance 
contracts. 

vi. Legality 

The object of the contract must be legal, for example, no insurance can be 
had for illegal acts. Every agreement of which the object or consideration is 
unlawful is void. The object of an insurance contract is a lawful object. 

Important 

i. Coercion - Involves pressure applied through criminal means. 

ii. Undue influence - When a person who is able to dominate the will of 
another, uses her position to obtain an undue advantage over the other. 

iii. Fraud - When a person induces another to act on a false belief that is 
caused by a representation he or she does not believe to be true. It can 
arise 
either 
from 
deliberate 
concealment 
of 
facts 
or 
through 
misrepresenting them.
83 
iv. Mistake - Error in one‟s knowledge or belief or interpretation of a thing or 
event. This can lead to an error in understanding and agreement about the 
subject matter of contract. 
3 

2. Insurance contracts – Special features 

a) Uberrima Fides or Utmost Good Faith 

This is one of the fundamental principles of an insurance contract. Also called 
uberrima fides, it means that every party to the contract must disclose all 
material facts relating to the subject matter of insurance. 

A distinction may be made between Good Faith and Utmost Good Faith. All 
commercial contracts in general require that good faith shall be observed in 
their transaction and there shall be no fraud or deceit when giving information. 
Apart from this legal duty to observe good faith, the seller is not bound to 
disclose any information about the subject matter of the contract to the buyer. 

The rule observed here is that of ―Caveat Emptor‖ which means Buyer 
Beware. The parties to the contract are expected to examine the subject 
matter of the contract and so long as one party does not mislead the other and 
the answers are given truthfully, there is no question of the other party 
avoiding the contract 

Utmost Good Faith: Insurance contracts stand on a different footing. Firstly, 
the subject matter of the contract is intangible and cannot be easily known 
through direct observation or experience by the insurer. Again there are many 
facts, which by their very nature, may be known only to the proposer. The 
insurer has to often rely entirely on the latter for information. 

Hence the proposer has a legal duty to disclose all material information about 
the subject matter of insurance to the insurers who do not have this 
information. 

Example 

David made a proposal for an insurance policy. At the time of applying for the 
policy, David was suffering from and under treatment for Diabetes. But David 
did not disclose this fact to the insurance company. David was in his thirties, so 
the insurance company issued the policy without asking David to undergo a 
medical test. Few years down the line, David‟s health deteriorated and he had 
to be hospitalised. David could not recover and died in the next few days. A 
claim was raised on the insurance company. 

To the surprise of David‟s nominee, the insurance company rejected the claim. 
In its investigation, the insurance company found out that David was already 
suffering from diabetes at the time of applying for the policy and this fact was 
deliberately hidden by David. Hence the insurance contract was declared null 
and void and the claim was rejected.
84 

Material information is that information which enables the insurers to decide: 

 Whether they will accept the risk? 
 If so, at what rate of premium and subject to what terms and conditions? 

This legal duty of utmost good faith arises under common law. The duty applies 
not only to material facts which the proposer knows, but also extends to 
material facts which he ought to know. 

Example 

Following are some examples of material information that the proposer should 
disclose while making a proposal: 

i. Life Insurance: own medical history, family history of hereditary 
illnesses, habits like smoking and drinking, absence from work, age, 
hobbies, financial information like income details of proposer, pre-
existing life insurance policies, occupation etc. 
ii. Fire Insurance: construction and usage of building, age of the building, 
nature of goods in premises etc. 
iii. Marine Insurance: description of goods, method of packing etc. 
iv. Motor Insurance: description of vehicle, date of purchase, details of 
driver etc. 
v. Health Insurance: 

Insurance contracts are thus subject to a higher obligation. When it comes to 
insurance, good faith contracts become utmost good faith contracts. 

Definition 

The concept of "Uberrima fides" is defined as involving “a positive duty to 
voluntarily disclose, accurately and fully, all facts material to the risk being 
proposed, whether requested or not". 

If utmost good faith is not observed by either party, the contract may be 
avoided by the other. This essentially means that no one should be allowed to 
take advantage of his own wrong especially while entering into a contract of 
insurance. 

It is expected that the insured should not make any misrepresentation regarding 
any fact that is material for the insurance contract. The insured must disclose 
all relevant facts. If this obligation did not exist, a person taking insurance 
might suppress certain facts impacting the risk on the subject matter and 
receive an undue benefit. 
The policyholder is expected to disclose the status of his health, family history, 
income, occupation etc. truthfully without concealing any material fact so as to
85 
enable the underwriter to assess the risk properly. In case of non-disclosure or 
misrepresentation in the proposal form which may have impacted the 
underwriting decision of the underwriter, the insurer has a right to cancel the 
contract. 

The law imposes an obligation to disclose all material facts. 

Example 

An executive is suffering from hypertension and had a mild heart attack 
recently following which he decides to take a medical policy but does not reveal 
the same. The insurer is thus duped into accepting the proposal due to 
misrepresentation of facts by insured. 

An individual has a congenital hole in the heart and reveals it in the proposal 
form. The same is accepted by the insurer and proposer is not informed that 
pre-existing diseases are not covered for at least 4 years. This is misleading of 
facts by the insurer. 

b) Material facts 

Definition 

Material fact has been defined as a fact that would affect the judgment of an 
insurance underwriter in deciding whether to accept the risk and if so, the rate 
of premium and the terms and conditions. 

Whether an undisclosed fact was material or not would depend on the 
circumstances of the individual case and could be decided ultimately only in a 
court of law. The insured has to disclose facts that affect the risk. 

Let us take a look at some of the types of material facts in insurance that one 
needs to disclose: 

i. Facts indicating that the particular risk represents a greater exposure 
than normal. 

Example 

Hazardous nature of cargo being carried at sea, past history of illness 

ii. Existence of past policies taken from all insurers and their present status 

iii. All questions in the proposal form or application for insurance are 
considered to be material, as these relate to various aspects of the 
subject matter of insurance and its exposure to risk. They need to be 
answered truthfully and be full in all respects. 

The following are some scenarios wherein material facts need not be disclosed
86 
Information 

Material Facts that need not be disclosed 

It is also held that unless there is a specific enquiry by underwriters, the 
proposer has no obligation to disclose the following facts: 

i. Measures implemented to reduce the risk. 

Example: The presence of a fire extinguisher 

ii. Facts which the insured does not know or is unaware of 

Example: An individual, who suffers from high blood pressure but was 
unaware about the same at the time of taking the policy, cannot be charged 
with non-disclosure of this fact. 

iii. Which could be discovered, by reasonable diligence? 

It is not necessary to disclose every minute material fact. The underwriters 
must be conscious enough to ask for the same if they require further 
information. 

iv. Matters of law 

Everybody is supposed to know the law of the land. 

Example: Municipal laws about storing of explosives 

v. About which insurer appears to be indifferent (or has waived the 
need for further information) 

The insurer cannot later disclaim responsibility on grounds that the answers 
were incomplete. 

When is there a duty to disclose? 

In the case of insurance contracts, the duty to disclose is present throughout 
the entire period of negotiation until the proposal is accepted and a policy is 
issued. Once the policy is accepted, there is no further need to disclose any 
material facts that may come up during the term of the policy. 

Example 

Mr. Rajan has taken a insurance policy for a term of fifteen years. Six years 
after taking the policy, Mr. Rajan has some heart problems and has to undergo 
some surgery. Mr. Rajan does not need to disclose this fact to the insurer. 

However if the policy is in a lapsed condition because of failure to pay the 
premiums when due and the policy holder seeks to revive the policy contract
87 
and bring it back in force, he may, at the time of such revival, have the duty to 
disclose all facts that are material and relevant, as though it is a new policy. 

Breach of Utmost Good Faith 

We shall now consider situations which would involve a Breach of Utmost Good 
Faith. Such breach can arise either through Non-Disclosure or Misrepresentation. 

Non-Disclosure: may arise when the insured is silent in general about material 
facts because the insurer has not raised any specific enquiry. It may also arise 
through evasive answers to queries raised by the insurer. Often disclosure may 
be inadvertent (meaning it may be made without one‟s knowledge or intention) 
or because the proposer thought that a fact was not material. 

In such a case it is innocent. When a fact is intentionally suppressed it is treated 
as concealment. In the latter case there is intent to deceive. 

Misrepresentation: Any statement made during negotiation of a contract of 
insurance is called representation. A representation may be a definite 
statement of fact or a statement of belief, intention or expectation. With 
regard to a fact it is expected that the statement must be substantially correct. 
When it comes to Representations that concern matters of belief or 
expectation, it is held that these must be made in good faith. 

Misrepresentation is of two kinds: 

i. Innocent Misrepresentation relates to inaccurate statements, which are 
made without any fraudulent intention. 
ii. Fraudulent Misrepresentation on the other hand refers to false 
statements that are made with deliberate intent to deceive the insurer 
or are made recklessly without due regard for truth. 

An insurance contract generally becomes void when there is a clear case of 
concealment 
with 
intent 
to 
deceive, 
or 
when 
there 
is 
fraudulent 
misrepresentation. 

Recent amendments (March, 2015) to Insurance Act, 1938 have provided certain 
guidelines about the conditions under which a policy can be called into question 
for fraud. The new provisions are as follows 

Fraud 
A policy of insurance may be called in question at any time within three years 
from the date of issuance of the policy or the date of commencement of risk or 
the date of revival, of the policy or the date of the rider to the policy, 
whichever is later, on the ground of fraud: 
The insurer shall have to communicate in writing to the insured or the legal 
representatives or nominees or assignees of the insured the grounds and 
materials on which such decision is based.
88 
The term “Fraud” has been defined and specified as follows: 
The expression "fraud" means any of the following acts committed by the 
insured or by his agent, with the intent to deceive the insurer or to induce the 
insurer to issue a insurance policy: 
(a) the suggestion, as a fact of that which is not true and which the insured 
does not believe to be true; 
(b) the active concealment of a fact by the insured having knowledge or belief 
of the fact; 
(c) any other act fitted to deceive; and 
(d) any such act or omission as the law specially declares to be fraudulent. 
Mere silence as to facts likely to affect the assessment of the risk by the insurer 
is not fraud, unless the circumstances of the case are such that regard being 
had to them, it is the duty of the insured or his agent, keeping silence to speak, 
or unless his silence is, in itself, equivalent to speak. 
No insurer shall repudiate a insurance policy on the ground of fraud if the 
insured can prove that the mis-statement of or suppression of a material fact 
was true to the best of his knowledge and belief or that there was no deliberate 
intention to suppress the fact or that such mis-statement of or suppression of a 
material fact are within the knowledge of the insurer: 
It is also provided that in case of fraud, the onus of disproving lies upon the ben
eficiaries, in case the policyholder is not alive. 
A person who solicits and negotiates a contract of insurance shall be deemed for 
the purpose of the formation of the contract, to be the agent of the insurer. 

c) Insurable interest 

The existence of „insurable interest‟ is an essential ingredient of every 
insurance contract and is considered as the legal pre-requisite for insurance. 
Let us see how insurance differs from a gambling or wager agreement. 

i. Gambling and insurance 

Consider a game of cards, where one either loses or wins. The loss or gain 
happens only because the person enters the bet. The person who plays the 
game has no further interest or relationship with the game other than that 
he might win the game. Betting or, wagering is not legally enforceable in a 
court of law and thus any contract in pursuance of it will be held to be 
illegal. In case someone pledges his house if he happens to lose a game of 
cards, the other party cannot approach the court to ensure its fulfillment.
89 
Now consider a house and the event of it burning down. The individual who 
insures his house has a legal relationship with the subject matter of 
insurance – the house. He owns it and is likely to suffer financially, if it is 
destroyed or damaged. This relationship of ownership exists independent of 
whether the fire happens or does not happen, and it is the relationship that 
leads to the loss. The event (fire or theft) will lead to a loss regardless of 
whether one takes insurance or not. 

Unlike a card game, where one could win or lose, a fire can have only one 
consequence – loss to the owner of the house. 

The owner takes insurance to ensure that the loss suffered is compensated 
for in some way. 

The interest that the insured has in his house or his money is termed as 
insurable interest. The presence of insurable interest makes an insurance 
contract valid and enforceable under the law. 

Example 

Mr. Chandrasekhar owns a house for which he has taken a mortgage loan of 
Rs. 15 lakhs from a bank. Ponder over the below questions: 

 Does he have an insurable interest in the house? 
 Does the bank have an insurable interest in the house? 
 What about his neighbour? 

Mr. Srinivasan has a family consisting of spouse, two kids and old parents. 
Ponder over the below questions: 

 Does he have an insurable interest in their well-being? 
 Does he stand to financially lose if any of them are hospitalised? 
 What about his neighbour‟s kids? Would he have an insurable interest in 
them? 

It would be relevant here to make a distinction between the subject matter 
of insurance and the subject matter of an insurance contract. 

Subject matter of insurance relates to property being insured against, 
which has an intrinsic value of its own. 

Subject matter of an insurance contract on the other hand is the insured‟s 
financial interest in that property. It is only when the insured has such an 
interest in the property that he has the legal right to insure. The insurance 
policy in the strictest sense covers not the property per se, but the insured‟s 
financial interest in the property.
90 

Diagram 3: Insurable interest according to common law 

ii. Time when insurable interest should be present 

In insurance, insurable interest should be present at the time of taking the 
policy. In general insurance, insurable interest should be present both at the 
time of taking the policy and at the time of claim with some exceptions like 
marine policies. 

d) Proximate Cause 

The last of the legal principles is the principle of proximate cause. 
Proximate cause is a key principle of insurance and is concerned with how the 
loss or damage actually occurred and whether it is indeed as a result of an 
insured peril. If the loss has been caused by the insured peril, the insurer is 
liable. If the immediate cause is an insured peril, the insurer is bound to make 
good the loss, otherwise not. 

Under this rule, the insurer looks for the predominant cause which sets into 
motion the chain of events producing the loss. This may not necessarily be the 
last event that immediately preceded the loss i.e. it is not necessarily an event 
which is closest to, or immediately responsible for causing the loss. 

Other causes may be classified as remote causes, which are separate 
from proximate causes. Remote causes may be present but are not 
effectual in causing an event. 

Definition 

Proximate cause is defined as the active and efficient cause that sets in motion 
a chain of events which brings about a result, without the intervention of any 
force started and working actively from a new and independent source.
91 
How does the principle of proximate cause apply to insurance contracts? In 
general, since insurance provides for payment of a death benefit, regardless of 
the cause of death, the principle of proximate cause would not apply. However 
many insurance contracts also have an accident benefit rider wherein an 
additional sum assured is payable in the event of accidental death. In such a 
situation, it becomes necessary to ascertain the cause - whether the death 
occurred as a result of an accident. The principle of proximate cause would 
become applicable in such instances. 

Contract of Adhesion 

Adhesion contracts are those that are drafted by the party having 
greater bargaining advantage, providing the other party with only the 
opportunity to adhere to i.e., to accept the contract or reject it. Here 
the insurance company has all the bargaining power regarding the terms 
and conditions of the contract. 
To neutralise this, a free-look period has been introduced whereby a 
policyholder, after taking a policy, has the option of cancelling the it, in 
case of disagreement, within 15 days of receiving the policy document. 
The company has to be intimated in writing and premium is refunded 
less expenses and charges. 

e) Indemnity 

The principle of indemnity is applicable to Non-life insurance policies. It means 
that the policyholder, who suffers a loss, is compensated so as to put him or 
her in the same financial position as he or she was before the occurrence of 
the loss event. The insurance contract (evidenced through insurance policy) 
guarantees that the insured would be indemnified or compensated up to the 
amount of loss and no more. 

The philosophy is that one should not make a profit through insuring one‟s 
assets and recovering more than the loss. The insurer would assess the 
economic value of the loss suffered and compensate accordingly. 

Example 

Ram has insured his house, worth Rs. 10 lakhs, for the full amount. He suffers 
loss on account of fire estimated at Rs. 70000. The insurance company would 
pay him an amount of Rs. 70000. The insured can claim no further amount. 

Consider a situation now where the property has not been insured for its full 
value. One would then be entitled to indemnity for loss only in the same 
proportion as one‟s insurance. 

Suppose the house, worth Rs. 10 lakhs has only been insured for a sum of Rs. 5 
lakhs. If the loss on account of fire is Rs. 60000, one cannot claim this entire 
amount. It is deemed that the house owner has insured only to the tune of half
92 
its value and he is thus entitled to claim just 50% [Rs. 30000] of the amount of 
loss. This is also known as underinsurance. 

The measurement of indemnity to be paid would depend on the type of 
insurance one takes. 

In most types of non-life insurance policies, which deal with insurance of 
property and liability, the insured is compensated to the extent of actual 
amount of loss i.e. the amount of money needed to replace lost or damaged 
property at current market prices less depreciation. 

Indemnity might take one or more of the following modes of settlement: 

 Cash payment 
 Repair of a damaged item 
 Replacement of the lost or damaged item 
 Restoration, (Reinstatement) for example, rebuilding a house destroyed 
by fire 

Diagram 1: Indemnity 

But, there is some subject matter whose value cannot be easily estimated or 
ascertained at the time of loss. For instance, it may be difficult to put a price in 
the case of family heirlooms or rare artefacts. Similarly in marine insurance 
policies it may be difficult to estimate the extent of loss suffered in a ship 
accident half way around the world. 

In such instances, a principle known as the Agreed Value is adopted. The insurer 
and insured agree on the value of the property to be insured, at the beginning 
of the insurance contract. In the event of total loss, the insurer agrees to pay 
the agreed amount of the policy. This type of policy is known as “Agreed Value 
Policy”.
93 
f) Subrogation 

Subrogation follows from the principle of indemnity. 

Subrogation means the transfer of all rights and remedies, with respect to 
the subject matter of insurance, from the insured to the insurer. 

It means that if the insured has suffered from loss of property caused due to 
negligence of a third party and has been paid indemnity by the insurer for 
that loss, the right to collect damages from the negligent party would lie 
with the insurer. Note that the amount of damage that can be collected is 
only to the extent of amount paid by the insurance company. 

Important 

Subrogation: It is the process an insurance company uses to recover claim 
amounts paid to a policy holder from a negligent third party. 

Subrogation can also be defined as surrender of rights by the insured to an 
insurance company that has paid a claim against the third party. 

Example 

Mr. Kishore‟s household goods were being carried in Sylvain Transport service. 
They got damaged due to driver‟s negligence, to the extent of Rs 45000 and the 
insurer paid an amount of Rs 30000 to Mr. Kishore. The insurer stands 
subrogated to the extent of only Rs 30000 and can collect that amount from 
Sylvain Transports. 

Suppose, the claim amount is for Rs 45,000/, insured is indemnified by the 
insurer for Rs 40,000, and the insurer is able to recover under subrogation Rs 
45,000/ from Sylvain Transports, then the balance amount of Rs 5000 will have 
to be given to the insured. 

This prevents the insured from collecting twice for the loss - once from the 
insurance company and then again from the third party. Subrogation arises 
only in case of contracts of indemnity. 

Example 

Mr. Suresh dies in an air crash. His family is entitled to collect the full sum 
assured of Rs 50 lakhs from the insurer who have issued a Personal Accident 
Policy plus the compensation paid by the airline, say, Rs 15 lakhs.
94 
Test Yourself 1 

Which among the following is an example of coercion? 

I. Ramesh signs a contract without having knowledge of the fine print 
II. Ramesh threatens to kill Mahesh if he does not sign the contract 
III. Ramesh uses his professional standing to get Mahesh to sign a contract 
IV. Ramesh provides false information to get Mahesh to sign a contract 

Test Yourself 2 

Which among the following options cannot be insured by Ramesh? 

I. Ramesh‟s house 
II. Ramesh‟s spouse 
III. Ramesh‟s friend 
IV. Ramesh‟s parents
95 
Summary 

 
Insurance involves a contractual agreement in which the insurer agrees to 
provide financial protection against specified risks for a price or 
consideration known as the premium. 

 
A contract is an agreement between parties, enforceable at law. 

 
The elements of a valid contract include: 

i. Offer and acceptance 
ii. Consideration, 
iii. Consensus ad-idem, 
iv. Free consent 
v. Capacity of the parties and 
vi. Legality of the object 

 
The special features of insurance contracts include: 

i. Uberrima fides, 
ii. Insurable interest, 
iii. Proximate cause 

Key Terms 

1. Offer annd acceptance 
2. Lawful consideration 
3. Consensus ad idem 
4. Uberrima fides 
5. Material facts 
6. Insurable interest 
7. Proximate cause
96 
Answers to Test Yourself 

Answer 1 

The correct option is II. 

Ramesh threatening to kill Mahesh if he does not sign the contract is an example 
of coercion. 

Answer 2 

The correct option is III. 

Ramesh does not have insurable interest in his friend‟s life and hence cannot 
insure the same. 

Self-Examination Questions 

Question 1 

Which element of a valid contract deals with premium?