A term insurance policy also comes handy as an income replacement 
plan. Here in place of payment of a lump-sum amount to the dependents, 
on the happening of an unfortunate death during the term of the policy, a 
series of monthly, quarterly or similar periodical pay outs for a pre-defined 
duration may be provided to the dependent beneficiaries.
142 

b) Disability 

Normally a term insurance policy covers only death. However, when it is 
purchased with a disability protection rider on the main policy and if 
someone were to suffer such a catastrophe during the period of term 
insurance, the insurance company will provide a payout to the 
beneficiaries/insured person. If the insured dies after the term ends, there 
are no benefits available as the deal is over as soon as the term expires. 

Diagram 3: Disability 

c) Term insurance as a rider 

Protection under term life is usually provided as a stand-alone policy but it 
could also be provided through a rider in a policy. 

Example 

A pension plan may contain provision for a death benefit to be payable in 
case one dies before the date when pension is to start. 

d) Renewability 

The premiums are generally charged at a fixed annual rate for the whole 
duration of term insurance. Some plans have an option to renew at the end 
of the term duration; however, in these products the premium will be 
recalculated based on one‟s age and health at that stage and also the new 
term for which the policy is being renewed. 

e) Convertibility 

Convertible term insurance policies allow a policyholder to change or 
convert a term insurance policy into a permanent plan like “Whole Life” 
without providing fresh evidence of insurability. This privilege helps those 
who wish to have permanent cash value insurance but are temporarily 
unable to afford its high premiums. When the term policy is converted into 
permanent insurance the new premium rate would be higher.
143 

f) USP 

The unique selling proposition (USP) of term assurance is its low price, 
enabling one to buy relatively large amounts of life insurance on a limited 
budget. It thus makes a good plan for the main income earner, who wishes 
to protect his/her loved ones from financial insecurity in case of premature 
death, and who has a limited budget for making insurance premium 
payments. 

g) Variants 

A number of variants of term assurance are possible. 

Diagram 4: Variants of Term Assurance 

i. Decreasing term assurance 

These plans provide a death benefit that decreases in amount with term of 
coverage. A ten year decreasing term policy may thus offer a benefit of Rs. 
1,00,000 for death in the first year, with the amount decreasing by Rs. 
10,000 on each policy anniversary, to finally come to zero at the end of the 
tenth year. The premium payable each year however remains level. 

Decreasing Term Assurance plans have been marketed as mortgage 
redemption and credit life insurance. 

 Mortgage redemption: is a plan of decreasing term insurance 
designed to provide a death amount that corresponds to the 
decreasing amount owed on a mortgage loan. Typically in such loans, 
each equated monthly instalment (EMI) payment leads to a reduction 
of the outstanding principal amount. The insurance may be arranged 
such that the amount of death benefit at any given time equals the 
balance of principal owed. The term of the policy would correspond 
to the length of the mortgage. The renewal premiums are generally 
level throughout the term. Purchase of mortgage redemption is often 
a condition of the mortgage loan.
144 
 Credit life insurance is a type of term insurance plan designed to 
pay the balance due on a loan, if the borrower dies before the loan is 
repaid. Like mortgage redemption it is usually decreasing term 
assurance. It is more popularly sold to lending institutions as group 
insurance to cover the lives of the borrowers of these institutions. It 
may be also available for automobile and other personal loans. The 
benefit under these policies is often paid directly to the lender or 
creditor if the insured borrower dies during the policy term. 

ii. Increasing term assurance 

As the name suggests, the plan provides a death benefit, which increases 
along with the term of the policy. The sum may increase by a specified 
amount or by a percentage at stated intervals over the policy term. 
Alternatively the face amount may increase according to a rise in the cost of 
living index. Premium generally increases as the amount of coverage 
increases. 

iii. Term insurance with return of premiums 

Yet another type of policy (quite popular in India) has been that of term 
assurance with return of premiums. The plan leaves the policyholder with 
the satisfaction that he / she has not lost anything in case he/she survives 
the term. Obviously the premium paid would be much higher than that 
applicable for an equivalent term assurance without return of premiums. 

h) Relevant scenarios 

Term insurance has been perceived to hold much relevance in the following 
situations: 

i. Where the need for insurance protection is purely temporary, as in case 
of mortgage redemption or for protection of a speculative investment 

ii. As an additional supplement to a savings plan, for instance a young 
parent buying decreasing term assurance to provide additional 
protection for dependents in the growing years. Convertible term 
assurance may be suggested as an option where a permanent plan is non-
affordable. 

iii. As part of a “buy term and invest the rest” philosophy, where the buyer 
seeks to buy only cheap term insurance protection from the insurance 
company and to invest the resultant difference of premiums in a more 
attractive investment option elsewhere. The policyholder must of course 
bear the risks involved in such investment.
145 
i) Considerations 

Price is in sum the primary basis of competitive advantage in term 
assurance plans. This is particularly seen in case of yearly renewable term 
policies that are cheaper than their level premium counterparts. 

The problem with such one-year term plans is that mortality costs rise with 
age. They are thus attractive only for those with a short period insurance 
planning horizon. 

Important 

Limitations of term plans 

At the same time one must be aware of the limitations of term assurance 
plans. The major problem arises when the purpose of taking insurance cover 
is more permanent and the need for life insurance protection extends 
beyond the policy period. The policy owner may be uninsurable after the 
term expires and hence unable to obtain a new policy at say age 65 or 70. 
Individuals would seek more permanent plans for the purpose of preserving 
their wealth against erosion from terminal illness, or to leave a bequest 
behind. Term assurance may not work in such situations. 

2. Whole life insurance 

While term assurance policies are examples of temporary assurance, where 
protection is available for a temporary period of time, whole life insurance is an 
example of a permanent life insurance policy. In other words there is no fixed 
term of cover but the insurer offers to pay the agreed upon death benefit 
when the insured dies, no matter whenever the death might occur. The 
premiums can be paid throughout one‟s life or for a specified period of time 
which is limited and is less than one‟s lifetime. 

Whole life premiums are much higher than term premiums since a whole life 
policy is designed to remain in force until the death of the insured, and 
therefore it is designed to always pay the death benefit. After the insurance 
company takes the amount of money it needs from the premium, to meet the 
cost of term insurance, the balance money is invested on behalf of the 
policyholder. This is called cash-value. One can withdraw cash in the form of a 
policy loan should he require emergency funds, or he can redeem by 
surrendering the policy for its cash value. 

In case of outstanding loans the amount of loan and interest gets deducted from 
the payout that is made to the designated beneficiaries upon death. 

A whole life policy is a good plan for one who is the main income earner of 
the family and wishes to protect the loved ones from any financial insecurity 
in case of premature death. This person must be able to afford the higher 
premiums of a whole life insurance policy on a consistent and long-term basis,
146 
and wants a life insurance policy which can pay a death benefit, regardless of 
when he/she dies, while at the same time wanting to be able to use the cash 
value of the whole life insurance policy for retirement needs, if required. 

Whole life insurance plays an important role in household saving and creating 
wealth to be passed on to the next generation. An important motive which 
drives its purchase is that of bequest – the desire to leave behind a legacy to 
one‟s future generations. A higher ownership of life insurance policies among 
households with children and a high regard for the family, further confirms this 
motive. 

3. Endowment assurance 

An endowment assurance contract is actually a combination of two plans: 

 A term assurance plan which pays the full sum assured in case of death 
of the insured during the term 
 A pure endowment plan which pays this amount if the insured survives at 
the end of the term 

The product thus has both a death and a survival benefit component. From 
an economic point of view, the contract is a combination of decreasing term 
insurance and an increasing investment element. Shorter the policy term, larger 
the investment element. 

The combination of term and investment elements is also present in whole life 
and other cash value contracts. It is however much more pronounced in the case 
of endowment assurance contracts. This makes it an effective vehicle to 
accumulate a specific sum of money over a period of time. 

Endowment is primarily a savings programme, which is protected by provision of 
insurance against the contingency of premature death. Its appeal to customers 
lies in the fact that it is an instrument that lends certainty to one‟s personal 
financial plans by linking insurance to one‟s savings programme. Endowment 
also offers a safe and compulsory method of savings accumulation. While 
prudent investment and asset liability management lends safety, the semi-
compulsory nature of premiums provides the incentive to save. 

People buy endowment plans as a sure method of providing against old age or 
for meeting specific purposes like having an education fund at the end of say 15 
years or a fund for meeting marriage expenses of one‟s daughters. There can be 
no playing around with these objectives. They have to be met with certainty. 

It has also served as an ideal way to pay for a mortgage (housing) loan. Not only 
is the loan protected against the uncertainty of repayment on account of death 
but the endowment proceeds could suffice to pay the principal.
147 
The policy has also been promoted as a means for thrift savings. Endowment 
can serve as a worthwhile proposition when one is looking for an avenue to set 
aside a surplus from income every month/quarter/year and commit it to the 
future. 

The plan is also made attractive because of the provision for deduction of 
premiums for tax purposes. 

Yet another proposition in the Indian context has been the facility to place the 
policy in a trust created under the MWPA (Married Women‘s Property Act), 
1874 the money can only be paid to the policy beneficiary, who is thus 
protected against all creditors‟ claims on the property of the insured. 

Finally many endowment policies mature at ages 55-65, when the insured is 
planning for his/her retirement and such policies may be a useful supplement to 
other sources of retirement savings. 

a) Variants 

Endowment assurance has certain variants that are discussed below. 

i. Money back plan 

A popular variant of endowment plans in India has been the Money Back 
policy. It is typically an endowment plan with the provision for return of 
a part of the sum assured in periodic installments during the term and 
balance of sum assured at the end of the term. 

Example 

A Money Back policy for 20 years may provide for 20% of the sum assured to 
be paid as a survival benefit at the end of 5, 10 and 15 years and the 
balance 40% to be paid at the end of the full term of 20 years. 

If the life assured dies at the end of say 18 years, the full sum assured and 
bonuses accrued are paid, regardless of the fact that the insurer has already 
paid a benefit of 60% of the face value. 

These plans have been very popular because of their liquidity (cash back) 
element, which renders them good vehicles for meeting short and medium 
term needs. Full death protection is meanwhile available when the 
individual dies at any point during the term of the policy. 

ii. Par and non-par schemes 

The term “Par” implies policies which are participating in the profits of the 
life insurer. “Non – Par” on the other hand represent policies which do not 
participate in the profits. Both kinds are present in traditional life 
insurance.
148 
Under all traditional plans, the pooled life funds, which are made up of the 
proceeds of premium received from policyholders, are invested under tight 
regulatory supervision, as per prescribed norms, and policyholders are either 
guaranteed a part of the growth or get a share of the surpluses that are 
generated by the insurer, under what are termed as “With Profit Plans”. 

Non-participating products may be offered either under a linked platform or 
a non-linked platform. In this chapter, we are concerned with policies which 
are non-linked. Typically without profit plans are those where the benefits 
are fixed and guaranteed at the time of the contract and the policyholder 
would be eligible for these benefits and no more. 

Example 

One may have an endowment policy of twenty years providing a guaranteed 
addition of 2% of sum assured for each year of term, so that the maturity 
benefit is sum assured plus a total addition of 40% of the sum assured. 

IRDAI‟s new guidelines on traditional non-par policies provide that for these 
policies, the benefits which are payable on the occurrence of a specific 
event are to be explicitly stated at the outset and not linked to any index of 
benchmark. 

Similarly additional benefits, if any, which are accrued at regular intervals 
during the policy term, have to be explicitly stated at the outset and not 
linked to any index of benchmark. In other words this means that the return 
on the policies should be disclosed at the beginning of the policy itself. The 
policyholder could calculate the net return and compare with other avenues 
to assess the policy costs. 

iii. Participating (Par) or with profit plans 

Unlike without profit or guaranteed plans, these plans have a provision for 
participation in profits. With profits policies have a higher premium than 
others. Profits are payable as bonuses or dividends. Bonuses are normally 
paid as reversionary bonuses. They are declared as a proportion of the sum 
assured (e.g. Rs. 70 per thousand sum assured) and are payable as additional 
benefits on a reversionary basis (at the end of the tenure of the policy, by 
death or maturity or surrender). 

Apart from reversionary bonuses which, once attached, are guaranteed, the 
life insurer may also declare terminal bonuses. These are contingent upon 
the life insurer earning some windfall gains and are not guaranteed. 

Terminal Bonuses were developed as a means to share with participating 
policy holders, the large windfall gains that were made through investment 
in capital markets in United Kingdom. They have also been adopted in India 
and many other developing markets.
149 

Information 

Dividend method of profit participation 

There are certain other markets like the USA where profits are shared in the 
form of dividends. Two approaches have been followed for dividend crediting. 

i. The traditional approach was the “Portfolio Method”. Here the total 
investment return on the portfolio held by the company was determined 
and all policyholders were credited their share of the divisible surplus. 
No attempt was made to distinguish the rate of return earned on monies 
that had been invested with the company in previous years from that 
deposited recently. The portfolio method thus homogenised rates of 
return and made them stable over time. It applied the principle of 
pooling of risks over time and is quite analogous in this respect to the 
uniform reversionary bonus mechanism. 

ii. The second approach is the “Current Money Method”. Here the return 
depends on when the investment was made and the rate that was 
secured at the time of investment. It has also been called segmented or 
investment block method as different investment blocks gets different 
returns. 

Traditional with profits (participating) policies thus offer some linkage to the 
life office‟s investment performance. The linkage however is not direct. What 
the policyholder gains by way of bonus depends on the periodic (usually annual) 
valuation of the fund‟s assets and liabilities. 

The surplus declared in the valuation depends on the assumptions made and 
factors taken into consideration by the valuation actuary. Even after the 
surplus is declared, its allocation among policyholders would depend on the 
decision of the company‟s management. Because of all this, the bonuses added 
to policies only follow investment performance in a very cushioned and distant 
manner. 

The basic logic underlying the approach is the smoothing out of investment 
returns over time. It is true that terminal bonuses and compound bonuses have 
enabled the policyholder to enjoy a larger slice of the benefits derived from 
equity investments. Nevertheless they still depend on the discretion of the life 
office who declares these bonuses. 

Finally, bonuses under a valuation are generally only declared once a year. They 
obviously cannot reflect the daily fluctuations in the value of assets. 
Traditional with profit plans thus represent a generation of products in which 
the life insurance company decides what is the structure of the product or plan, 
including the benefits (sum assured and bonuses) and premiums. Even when the
150 
life insurance company earns high returns in the investment market, it is not 
necessary that its bonuses or dividends be directly linked with these returns. 

The great advantage to the policyholder or insured has been that the 
certainty of investment makes these plans quite appropriate vehicles for 
meeting those needs that may require definite and dedicated funds. They 
also help to reduce the overall portfolio risk of an individual‟s investment 
portfolio. 

Important 

IRDAI‘s new guidelines for traditional products 

According to the guidelines, the product design of traditional plans would 
remain almost the same. 

a) New traditional products will have a higher death cover. 

i. For single premium policies it will be 125% of the single premium for 
those below 45 years and 110% of single premium for those above 45 
years. 
ii. For regular premium policies, the cover will be 10 times the annualised 
premium paid for those below 45 and seven times for others. 

b) The minimum death benefit in case of traditional plan is at least the 
amount of sum assured and the additional benefits (if any). 

c) In addition to the sum assured, the bonus / additional benefits as specified 
in the policy and accrued till date of death shall become payable on death if 
not paid earlier. 

d) These plans would continue to come in two variants, participating and non-
participating plans. 

i. For participating polices the bonus is linked to the performance of the 
fund and is not declared or guaranteed before. But, the bonus once 
announced becomes a guarantee. It is usually paid in case of death of 
the policyholder or maturity benefit. This bonus is also called 
reversionary bonus. 
ii. In case of non-participating policies, the return on the policy is 
disclosed in the beginning of the policy itself. 

Test Yourself 2 

The premium paid for whole life insurance is _____________ than the premium 
paid for term assurance. 

I. Higher 
II. Lower
151 
III. Equal 
IV. Substantially higher 

Summary 

 
Life insurance products offer protection against the loss of economic value 
of an individual‟s productive abilities, which is available to his dependents 
or to the self. 

 
A life insurance policy, at its core, provides peace of mind and protection to 
the near and dear ones of the individual in case something unfortunate 
happens to him. 

 
Term insurance provides valid cover only during a certain time period that 
has been specified in the contract. 

 
The unique selling proposition (USP) of term assurance is its low price, 
enabling one to buy relatively large amounts of life insurance on a limited 
budget. 

 
While term assurance policies are examples of temporary assurance, where 
protection is available for a temporary period of time, whole life insurance 
is an example of a permanent life insurance policy. 

 
An endowment assurance contract is actually a combination of two plans - a 
term assurance plan which pays the full sum assured in case of death of the 
insured during the term and a pure endowment plan which pays this amount 
if the insured survives at the end of the term. 

Key Terms 

1. Term insurance 
2. Whole life insurance 
3. Endowment assurance 
4. Money back policy 
5. Par and non-par schemes 
6. Reversionary bonus
152 

Answers to Test Yourself 

Answer 1 

The correct option is III. 

Life insurance is an intangible product. 

Answer 2 

The correct option is I. 

The premium paid for whole life insurance is higher than the premium paid for 
term assurance. 

Self-Examination Questions 

Question 1 

___________ life insurance pays off a policyholder's mortgage in the event of 
the person's death. 

I. Term 
II. Mortgage 
III. Whole 
IV. Endowment 

Question 2 

The ________ the premium paid by you towards your life insurance, the 
________ will be the compensation paid to the beneficiary in the event of your 
death. 

I. Higher, Higher 
II. Lower, Higher 
III. Higher, Lower 
IV. Faster, Slower 

Question 3 

Which of the below option is correct with regards to a term insurance plan? 

I. Term insurance plans come with life-long renewability option 
II. All term insurance plans come with a built-in disability rider 
III. Term insurance can be bought as a stand-alone policy as well as a rider with 
another policy 
IV. There is no provision in a term insurance plans to convert it into a whole life 
insurance plan
153 

Question 4 

In decreasing-term insurance, the premiums paid ____________ over time. 

I. Increase 
II. Decrease 
III. Remain constant 
IV. Are returned 

Question 5 

Using the conversion option present in a term policy you can convert the same 
to __________. 

I. Whole life policy 
II. Mortgage policy 
III. Bank FD 
IV. Decreasing term policy 

Question 6 

What is the primary purpose of a life insurance product? 

I. Tax rebates 
II. Safe investment avenue 
III. Protection against the loss of economic value of an individual‟s productive 
abilities 
IV. Wealth accumulation 

Question 7 

Who among the following is best advised to purchase a term plan? 

I. An individual who needs money at the end of insurance term 
II. An individual who needs insurance and has a high budget 
III. An individual who needs insurance but has a low budget 
IV. An individual who needs an insurance product that gives high returns 

Question 8 

Which of the below statement is incorrect with regards to decreasing term 
assurance? 

I. Death benefit amount decreases with the term of coverage 
II. Premium amount decreases with the term of coverage 
III. Premium remains level throughout the term 
IV. Mortgage redemption plans are an example of decreasing term assurance 
plans
154 

Question 9 

Which of the below statement is correct with regards to endowment assurance 
plan? 

I. It has a death benefit component only 
II. It has a survival benefit component only 
III. It has both a death benefit as well as a survival component 
IV. It is similar to a term plan 

Question 10 

Which of the below is an example of an endowment assurance plan? 

I. Mortgage Redemption Plan 
II. Credit Life Insurance Plan 
III. Money Back Plan 
IV. Whole Life Plan 

Answers to Self-Examination Questions 

Answer 1 

The correct option is II. 

Mortgage life insurance pays off a policyholder's mortgage in the event of the 
person's death. 

Answer 2 

The correct option is I. 

The higher the premium paid by you towards your life insurance, the higher will 
be the compensation paid to the beneficiary in the event of your death. 

Answer 3 

The correct option is III. 

Term insurance can be bought as a stand-alone policy as well as a rider with 
another policy 

Answer 4 

The correct option is III.
155 

In decreasing-term insurance, the premiums paid remain constant over time. 

Answer 5 

The correct option is I. 

Using the conversion option present in a term policy you can convert the same 
to whole life policy. 

Answer 6 

The correct option is III. 

Protection against the loss of economic value of an individual‟s productive 
abilities is the primary purpose behind a life insurance product. 

Answer 7 

The correct option is III. 

Term plan is a good choice for an individual who needs insurance and has a low 
budget. 

Answer 8 

The correct option is II. 

Premium remains level throughout the term for decreasing term assurance 
plans. 

Answer 9 

The correct option is III. 

Endowment assurance plan has both a death benefit as well as a survival 
component. 

Answer 10 

The correct option is III. 

Money Back Plan is an example of an endowment assurance plan.
156 

CHAPTER 9 

LIFE INSURANCE PRODUCTS – II 

Chapter Introduction 

The chapter introduces you to the world of non-traditional life insurance 
products. We start by examining the limitations of traditional life insurance 
products and then have a look at the appeal of non-traditional life insurance 
products. Finally we look at some of the different types of non-traditional life 
insurance products available in the market. 

Learning Outcomes 

A. Overview of non-traditional life insurance products 
B. Non-traditional life insurance products
157 

A. Overview of non-traditional life insurance products 

1. Non-traditional life insurance products – Purpose and need 

In the previous chapters we have considered some of the traditional life 
insurance products which have insurance as well as a savings element in them. 
These products have often been considered as being part of the financial 
market and compared with other instruments of capital accumulation. 

One of the principal purposes of saving and investing, we must note, is to 
achieve inter-temporal allocation of resources, which is both efficient and 
effective. 

i. 
Inter-temporal allocation means allocation across time. The term 
effective here implies that sufficient funds are available to successfully 
satisfy various needs as they arise in different stages of the life cycle. 
ii. Efficient allocation on the other hand implies a faster rate of 
accumulation and more funds available in future. Higher the return for a 
given level of risk, the more efficient would the investment be. 

A critical point of concern with respect to life insurance policies has been the 
issue of giving a competitive rate of return which is comparable to that of other 
assets in the financial market place. It would be useful to examine some of the 
features of the traditional cash value plans of life insurance that we discussed 
in the previous chapter. These have been called bundled plans because of the 
way their structure is bundled and presented as a single package of benefits and 
premium. 

2. Limitations of traditional products 

A critical examination would reveal the following areas of concern: 

a) Cash value component: Firstly, the savings or cash value component in 
such policies is not well defined. It depends on the amount of actuarial 
reserve that is set up. This in turn is determined by assumptions about 
mortality, interest rates, expenses and other parameters that are set by 
the life insurer. These assumptions can be quite arbitrary. 

b) Rate of return: Secondly it is not easy to ascertain what would be rate 
of return on these policies. This is because the value of the benefits 
under “With Profit policies” would be known for sure, only when the 
contract comes to an end. Again, the exact costs of the insurer are not 
disclosed. This lack of clarity about the rate of return makes it difficult 
to compare them with other alterative instruments of savings. Obviously 
one cannot know how efficient life insurance is as a savings instrument 
unless one can make such comparison. 

c) Surrender value: A third problem is that the cash and surrender values 
(at any point of time), under these contracts depend on certain values 
(like the amount of actuarial reserve and the pro-rata asset share of the
158 
policy). These values may be determined quite arbitrarily. The method 
of arriving at surrender value is not visible. 

d) Yield: Finally there is the issue of the yield on these policies. Both 
because of prudential norms and tight supervision on investment and 
because 
bonuses 
do 
not 
immediately 
reflect 
the 
investment 
performance of the life insurer, the yields on these policies may not be 
as high as can be obtained from more risky investments. 

3. The shifts 

As the limitations of traditional life insurance plans became obvious, a number 
of shifts occurred in the product profiles of life insurers. These have been 
summarised below: 

a) Unbundling 

This trend involved separation of the protection and savings elements and 
consequently the development of products, which stressed on protection or 
savings, rather than a vague mix of both. 

While in markets like the United States, these led to a rediscovery of term 
insurance and new products like universal assurance and variable assurance, 
the United Kingdom and other markets witnessed the rise of unit linked 
insurance. 

b) Investment linkage 

The second trend was the shift towards investment linked products, which 
linked benefits to policyholders with an index of investment performance. 
There was consequently a shift in the way life insurance was positioned. The 
new products like unit linked implied that life insurers had a new role to 
play. They were now efficient fund managers with the mandate of providing 
a high competitive rate of yield, rather than mere providers of financial 
security. 

c) Transparency 

Unbundling also ushered greater visibility in the rate of return and in the 
charges made by the companies for their services (like expenses etc.). All 
these were explicitly spelt out and could thus be compared 

d) Non-standard products 

The fourth major trend has been a shift from rigid to flexible product 
structures, which is also seen as a move towards non-standard products. 
When we speak of non–standard, it is with respect to the degree of choice 
which a customer can exercise with respect to designing the structure and 
benefits of the policy.
159 
There are two areas where customers may actively participate in this regard 

 While fixing and altering the structure of premiums and benefits 
 While choosing how to invest the premium proceeds 

4. The appeal – Needs met 

The major sources of appeal of the new genre of products that emerged 
worldwide are given below: 

a) Direct linkage with the investment gains: First of all, there was the 
prospect of direct linkage with the investment gains which life insurance 
companies could make through investment in a buoyant and promising 
capital market. One of the most important arguments in support of 
investment linked insurance policies has been that, even though in the 
short run, there may be some ups and downs in the equity markets the 
returns from these markets would, in the longer run, be much higher 
than that of other secured fixed income instruments. Life insurers who 
are able to efficiently manage their investment portfolios could generate 
superior returns for their customers and thus develop high value 
products. 

b) Inflation beating returns: The importance of yield also stems from the 
impact of inflation on savings. As we all know, inflation can erode the 
purchasing power of one‟s wealth so that, if a rupee today would be 
worth only 30 paisa after fifteen years, a principal of Rs. 100 today 
would need to grow to at least Rs. 300 in fifteen years in order to be 
worth what it is today. This means that the rate of yield on a life 
insurance policy must be significantly higher than the rate of inflation. 
This is where investment linked insurance policies were especially able 
to score over traditional life insurance policies. 

c) Flexibility: A third reason for their appeal was their flexibility. 
Policyholders could now decide within limits, the amount of premium 
they wanted to pay and vary the amount of death benefits and cash 
values. In investment linked products, they also had the choice of 
investments and could also decide the mix of funds in which they wanted 
to have the proceeds of their premiums invested. This implied that 
policyholders could have a greater control over their investment in life 
insurance. 

d) Surrender value: Finally, the policies also allowed the policyholders to 
withdraw from the schemes after a specified initial period of years (say 
three to five), after deduction of a nominal surrender charge. The 
amount available on such surrender or encashment before the full term 
of the policy was much higher than the surrender values available under 
erstwhile traditional policies. 
These policies became very popular and even began to replace traditional 
products in many countries, including India because they were meeting a 
critical motive of many investors – the wealth accumulation motive which 
generated a demand for efficient investment vehicles. In the United States
160 
for example, products like “Universal Life” provided the means to pass on the 
benefits of high current interest rates returns which life insurers earned in 
money and capital markets very quickly to policyholders. 

Flexibility of premiums and face amount meanwhile enabled the policyholder to 
adjust the premiums to suit his or her particular situations. The convenience of 
early withdrawal without undue loss also meant that the policyholder no longer 
needed to lock his or her money for long periods of time. 

Test Yourself 1 

Which among the following is a non-traditional life insurance product? 

I. Term assurance 
II. Universal life insurance 
III. Endowment insurance 
IV. Whole life insurance
161 

B. Non-traditional life insurance products 

1. Some non-traditional products 

In the remaining paragraphs of this chapter we shall discuss some of the non-
traditional products which have emerged in the Indian market and elsewhere. 

a) Universal life 

Universal life insurance is a policy that was introduced in the United States 
in 1979 and quickly grew to become very popular by the first half of the 
eighties. 

As per the IRDAI Circular of November 2010, “All Universal Life products 
shall be known as Variable Insurance Products (VIP)”. 

Information 

About Universal Life 

Universal life insurance is a form of permanent life insurance characterised by 
its flexible premiums, flexible face amount and death benefit amounts, and 
the unbundling of its pricing factors. While traditional cash value policies 
require a specific gross or office premium to be paid periodically in order to 
keep the contract in force, universal life policies allow the policyholder within 
limits, to decide the amount of premiums he or she wants to pay for the 
coverage. Larger the size of the premium, greater the coverage provided and 
greater the policy‟s cash value. 

The major innovation of universal life insurance was the introduction of 
completely flexible premiums after the first policy year. One had only to ensure 
that premiums as a whole were enough to cover the costs of maintaining the 
policy. What this implied is that the policy could be deemed to be in force, so 
long as its cash value was sufficient to pay the mortality charges and expenses. 

Premium flexibility allowed the policyholder to make additional premiums 
above the target amount. It also allowed one to skip premium payments or 
make payments that were lower than the target amount. 

Flexibility of structures also enabled the policyholder to make partial 
withdrawals from the cash value that was available, without the obligation to 
repay this amount or pay any interest on it. The cash value was simply reduced 
to that extent. 

Flexibility also meant that the death benefits could be adjusted and the face 
amounts could be varied.
162 
However this kind of policy could be mis-sold. Indeed, in markets like the US, 
prospective customers were enticed by the proviso that „one needed to make 
only a few initial premium payments and then the policy would take care of 
itself‟. What they did not disclose was that cash values could maintain and keep 
the policy in force only if investment returns were adequate for the purpose. 

The decline of investment returns during latter half of the eighties led to 
erosion of cash values. Policyholders who failed to continue premium payments 
were shocked to find that their policies had lapsed and they no longer had any 
life insurance protection. 

Diagram 1: Non-traditional life insurance products 

In India, as per the IRDAI norms, there are thus only two kinds of non-traditional 
savings life insurance products that are permitted: 

 Variable insurance plans 
 Unit linked insurance plans 

i. 
Variable life insurance 

To begin with it would be useful to know about variable life insurance as 
introduced in the United States and other markets. 

This policy was first introduced in the United States in 1977. Variable life 
insurance is a kind of “Whole Life” policy where the death benefit and cash 
value of the policy fluctuates according to the investment performance of a 
special investment account into which premiums are credited. The policy 
thus provides no guarantees with respect to either the interest rate or 
minimum cash value. Theoretically the cash value can go down to zero, in 
which case the policy would terminate. 

The difference with traditional cash value policies is obvious. A traditional 
cash value policy has a face amount that remains level throughout the policy 
term. The cash value grows with premiums and interest earnings at a 
specified rate. Assets backing the policy reserves form part of a general 
investment account in which the insurer maintains the funds of its 
guaranteed products. These assets are placed in a portfolio of secured 
investments. The insurer can thus expect to earn a sturdy rate of return on 
the assets in this account.
163 

In contrast, assets representing the policy reserves of a variable life 
insurance policy are placed in a separate fund that do not form part of its 
general investment account. In the US this was termed as a separate 
account while in Canada it was termed as a segregated account. Most 
variable policies permitted policyholders to select from among several 
separate accounts and to change their selection at least once a year. 

In sum, here is a policy in which the cash values are funded by separate 
accounts of the life insurance company, and death benefits and cash values 
vary to reflect investment experience. The policy also provides a minimum 
death benefit guarantee for which the mortality and expense risks are borne 
by the insurance company. The premiums are fixed as under traditional 
whole life. The principal difference with traditional whole life policies is 
thus in the investment factor.