 This may require you to reflect on the message and ask questions to 
clarify what was said 
 Another important way to provide feedback is to paraphrase the 
speaker‟s words 
 Yet a third way is to periodically stop the speaker and make a 
summary of what the speaker has said and repeat it back to him or 
her.
49 
Example 

Asking for clarity - From what I have heard, am I right in assuming, that you 
have issues about the benefits of some of our health plans, could you be more 
specific? 

Paraphrasing the speaker‘s exact words - So you are saying that „our health 
plans are not providing benefits that are attractive enough‟ – have I understood 
you correctly? 

iv. Not being judgemental: 

One of the biggest hurdles to active listening is our tendency to be 
judgmental and biased about the speaker. The result is that the listener 
may hear what the speaker says but listens according to her own biased 
interpretation of what the speaker might be saying. 

Such judgmental approach can result in the listener being unwilling to 
allow the speaker to continue speaking, considering it a waste of time. It 
can also result in interrupting the speaker and rebutting the speaker with 
counter arguments, even before he or she has been able to convey the 
message in full. 

This will only frustrate the speaker and limits full understanding of the 
message. Active listening calls for: 

 Allowing the speaker to finish each point before asking questions 
 Not interrupting the speaker with any counter arguments 

v. Responding appropriately: 

Active listening implies much more than just hearing what a speaker says. 
The communication can be completed only when the listener responds in 
some way, through word or action. Certain rules need to be followed for 
ensuring that the speaker is not put down but treated with respect and 
deference. These include: 

 Being candid, open, and honest in your response 
 Asserting one‟s opinions respectfully 
 Treating another person in a way you would like to be treated 
yourself 

vi. Empathetic listening: 

Being empathetic literally means putting yourself in the other person‟s shoes 
and feeling his or her experience as he or she would feel it.
50 
Listening with empathy is an important aspect of all great customer service. 
It becomes especially critical when the other person is a customer with a 
grievance and in a lot of pain. 

Empathy implies hearing and listening patiently, and with full attention, to 
what the other person has to say, even when you do not agree with it. It is 
important to show the speaker acceptance, not necessarily agreement. One 
can do so by simply nodding or injecting phrases such as "I understand" or "I 
see." 

Test Yourself 5 

Which among the following is not an element of active listening? 

I. Paying good attention 
II. Being extremely judgemental 
III. Empathetic listening 
IV. Responding appropriately
51 

F. Ethical behaviour 

1. Overview 

Of late, serious concerns are voiced about the proprieties in business, because 
increasingly there are reports of improper behaviour. Some of the world‟s 
biggest companies have been found to have cheated through false accounts and 
dishonest audit certification. The funds of banks have been misused by their 
managements to bolster the greed of some friends. Officials have used their 
authority to promote personal benefits. Increasingly, people who are trusted by 
the community to perform their tasks are seen to have betrayed the trust. 
Personal aggrandisement and greed prevails. 

Consequently, there is increasing discussion about accountability and corporate 
governance, all of which together can be called “Ethics” in business. Acts like 
the ‗Right to Information Act‘ and developments like ‗Public Interest 
Litigation‘ have assumed considerable importance as instruments to achieve 
better accountability and governance. 

Ethical behaviour automatically leads to good governance. When one does her 
duty conscientiously and sincerely, there is good governance. Unethical 
behaviour shows little concern for others and high concern for self. When one 
tries to serve self-interest through one‟s official position, there is unethical 
behaviour. It is not wrong to look after one‟s interests. But it is wrong to do so 
at the cost of the interests of others. 

Insurance is a business of trust. Issues of propriety and ethics are extremely 
important in this business of insurance. Breach of trust amounts to cheating and 
is wrong. Things go wrong when wrong information is given to the prospects 
tempting them to buy insurance or the plan of insurance suggested does not 
cater to all the needs of the prospect. 

Unethical behaviour happens when the benefits of self are considered more 
important than of the other. The code of ethics spelt out by the IRDA in the 
various regulations is directed towards ethical behaviour. 

While it is important to know every clause in the code of conduct to ensure that 
there is no violation of the code, compliance would be automatic if the insurer 
and its representatives always kept the interests of the prospect in mind. Things 
go wrong when the officers of insurers become concerned with the targets of 
business, rather than the benefits to the prospect.
52 
2. Characteristics 

Some characteristics of ethical behaviour are: 

a) Placing best interests of the client above one‟s own direct or indirect 
benefits 

b) Holding in strictest confidence and considering as privileged, all business 
and personal information pertaining to client‟s affairs 

c) Making full and adequate disclosure of all facts to enable clients make 
informed decisions 

There could be a likelihood of ethics being compromised in the following 
situations: 

a) Having to choose between two plans, one giving much less premium or 
commission than the other 

b) Temptation to recommend discontinuance of an existing policy and 
taking out a new one 

c) Becoming aware of circumstances that, if known to the insurer, could 
adversely affect the interests of the client or the beneficiaries of the 
claim 

Test Yourself 6 

Which among the following is not a characteristic of ethical behaviour? 

I. Making adequate disclosures to enable the clients to make an informed 
decision 
II. Maintaining confidentiality of client‟s business and personal information 
III. Placing self-interest ahead of client‟s interests 
IV. Placing client‟s interest ahead of self interest
53 

Summary 

a) The role of customer service and relationships is far more critical in the case 
of insurance than in other products. 

b) Five major indicators of service quality include reliability, assurance, 
responsiveness, empathy and tangibles. 

c) Customer lifetime value may be defined as the sum of economic benefits 
that can be derived from building a sound relationship with a customer over 
a long period of time. 

d) The role of an insurance agent in the area of customer service is absolutely 
critical. 

e) IRDA has launched an Integrated Grievance Management System (IGMS) 
which acts as a central repository of insurance grievance data and as a tool 
for monitoring grievance redress in the industry. 

f) The Ombudsman, by mutual agreement of the insured and the insurer can 
act as a mediator and counsellor within the terms of reference. 

g) Active listening involves paying attention, providing feedback and 
responding appropriately. 

h) Ethical behaviour involves placing the customer‟s interest before self. 

Key terms 

a) Quality of service 
b) Empathy 
c) Integrated Grievance Management System (IGMS) 
d) Customer Protection Act, 1986 
e) District Consumer Forum 
f) Insurance Ombudsman 
g) Body language 
h) Active listening 
i) Ethical behaviour 

Answers to Test Yourself 

Answer 1 

The correct option is III. 

Sum of economic benefits that can be achieved by building a long term 
relationship with the customer is referred to as customer lifetime value.
54 
Answer 2 

The correct option is III. 

Motor insurance for third party liability is mandatory by law and hence a debate 
on its need is not required. 

Answer 3 

The correct option is II. 

As per the Consumer Protection Act, 1986, a person who buys goods for resale 
purpose cannot be classified as consumer. 

Answer 4 

The correct option is IV. 

Scepticism does not go on to make a healthy relationship. 

Answer 5 

The correct option is II. 

Being extremely judgemental is not an element of active listening. 

Answer 6 

The correct option is III. 

Placing self-interest ahead of client‟s interests is not ethical behaviour.
55 

Self-Examination Questions 

Question 1 

_____________ is not a tangible good. 

I. House 
II. Insurance 
III. Mobile Phone 
IV. A pair of jeans 

Question 2 

_______________ is not an indicator of service quality. 

I. Cleverness 
II. Reliability 
III. Empathy 
IV. Responsiveness 

Question 3 

In India _______________ insurance is mandatory. 

I. Motor third party liability 
II. Fire insurance for houses 
III. Travel insurance for domestic travel 
IV. Personal accident 

Question 4 

One of the methods of reducing insurance cost of an insured is __________ 

I. Reinsurance 
II. Deductible 
III. Co-insurance 
IV. Rebate 

Question 5 

A customer having complaint regarding his insurance policy can approach IRDA 
through 

I. IGMS 
II. District Consumer Forum 
III. Ombudsman 
IV. IGMS or District Consumer Forum or Ombudsman
56 
Question 6 

Consumer Protection Act deals with: 

I. Complaint against insurance companies 
II. Complaint against shopkeepers 
III. Complaint against brand 
IV. Complaint against insurance companies, brand and shopkeepers 

Question 7 

___________ has jurisdiction to entertain matters where value of goods or 
services and the compensation claim is up to 20 lakhs 

I. High Court 
II. District Forum 
III. State Commission 
IV. National Commission 

Question 8 

In customer relationship the first impression is created: 

I. By being confident 
II. By being on time 
III. By showing interest 
IV. By being on time, showing interest and being confident 

Question 9 

Select the correct statement: 

I. Ethical behaviour is impossible while selling insurance 
II. Ethical behaviour is not necessary for insurance agents 
III. Ethical behaviour helps in developing trust between the agent and the 
insurer 
IV. Ethical behaviour is expected from the top management only 

Question 10 

Active Listening involves: 

I. Paying attention to the speaker 
II. Giving an occasional nod and smile 
III. Providing feedback 
IV. Paying attention to the speaker, giving an occasional nod and smile and 
providing feedback
57 
Answers to Self-Examination Questions 

Answer 1 

The correct option is II. 

Insurance is not a tangible good. 

Answer 2 

The correct option is I. 

Cleverness is not an indicator of service quality. 

Answer 3 

The correct option is I. 

Motor third party liability insurance is mandatory in India. 

Answer 4 

The correct option is II. 

One of the methods of reducing insurance cost of an insured is the deductible 
clause in a policy. 

Answer 5 

The correct option is I. 

A customer having complaint regarding his insurance policy can approach IRDA 
through IGMS. 

Answer 6 

The correct option is IV. 

Consumer Protection Act deals with complaint against insurance companies, 
shopkeepers and brands. 

Answer 7 

The correct option is II. 

District Forum has jurisdiction to entertain where value of goods or services and 
the compensation claim is up to 20 lakhs.
58 
Answer 8 

The correct option is IV. 

In customer relationship the first impression is created by being confident, on 
time and by showing interest. 

Answer 9 

The correct option is III. 

Ethical behaviour helps in developing trust in the agent and the insurer. 

Answer 10 

The correct option is IV. 

Active Listening involves paying attention to the speaker, giving an occasional 
nod and smile and providing feedback.
59 
CHAPTER 3 

GRIEVANCE REDRESSAL MECHANISM 

Chapter Introduction 

Insurance industry is essentially a service industry where, in the present 
context, customer expectations are constantly rising and dissatisfaction with 
the standard of services rendered is ever present. Despite there being 
continuous product innovation and significant improvement in the level of 
customer service aided by use of modern technology, the industry suffers badly 
in terms of customer dissatisfaction and poor image. Alive to this situation the 
Government and the regulator have taken a number of initiatives. 

IRDAI‟s regulations stipulate the turnaround times (TAT) for various services 
that an insurance company has to render the consumer. These are part of the 
IRDAI (Protection of Policyholders‟ Interests Regulations), 2017.Insurance 
companies are also required to have an effective grievance redressal mechanism 
and IRDAI has created the guidelines for that too. 

Learning Outcomes 

A. Grievance redressal mechanism - Consumer courts, Ombudsman
60 
A. Grievance redressal mechanism – Consumer courts, Ombudsman 

1. Integrated Grievance Management System (IGMS) 

IRDAI has launched an Integrated Grievance Management System (IGMS) which 
acts as a central repository of insurance grievance data and as a tool for 
monitoring grievance redress in the industry. 

For any grievance the complainant is required to first approach the respective 
insurer. If no response provided or resolution of grievance is not to the 
satisfaction of the complainant, the complainant can approach the Regulator 
under the IGMS. Policyholders can register on this system with their policy 
details and lodge their complaints. Complaints are then forwarded to the 
respective insurance companies. 

Grievance redressal mechanism 

IGMS tracks complaints and the time taken for their redressal. The complaints 
can be registered at the following URL: 

http://www.policyholder.gov.in/Integrated_Grievance_Management.aspx 

2. The Consumer Protection Act, 1986 

Important 

This Act was passed “to provide for better protection of the interest of 
consumers and to make provision for the establishment of consumer councils 
and other authorities for the settlement of consumer‟s disputes”. The Act has 
been amended by the Consumer Protection (Amendment) Act, 2002. 

Some definitions provided in the Act are as follows: 

Definition 

“Service” means service of any description which is made available to potential 
users and includes the provision of facilities in connection with banking, 
financing, insurance, transport, processing, supply of electrical or other energy, 
board or lodging or both, housing construction, entertainment, amusement or 
the purveying of news or other information. But it does not include the 
rendering of any service free of charge or under a contract of personal service. 
Insurance is included as a service 

“Consumer” means any person who
61 
 Buys any goods for a consideration and includes any user of such goods. 
But it does not include a person who obtains such goods for resale or for 
any commercial purpose or 
 Hires or avails of any services for a consideration and includes beneficiary 
of such services. 

“Defect” means any fault, imperfection, shortcoming inadequacy in the quality, 
nature and manner of performance which is required to be maintained by or 
under any law or has been undertaken to be performed by a person in 
pursuance of a contract or otherwise in relation to any service. 

“Complaint” means any allegation in writing made by a complainant that: 

 an unfair trade practice or restrictive trade practice has been adopted 
 the goods bought by him suffer from one or more defects 
 the services hired or availed of by him suffer from deficiency in any 
respect 
 price charged is in excess of that fixed by law or displayed on package 
 goods which will be hazardous to life and safety when used are being 
offered for sale to the public in contravention of the provisions of any law 
requiring trader to display information in regard to the contents, manner 
and effect of use of such goods 

“Consumer dispute” means a dispute where the person against whom a 
complaint has been made, denies and disputes the allegations contained in the 
complaint. 

a) Consumer disputes redressal agencies 

“Consumer disputes redressal agencies” are established in each district and 
state and at national level. 

i. 
District Forum 

 The forum has jurisdiction to entertain complaints, where value of 
the goods or services and the compensation claimed is up to Rs.20 
lakhs. 
 The District Forum is empowered to send its order/decree for 
execution to appropriate civil court. 

ii. State Commission 

 This redressal authority has original, appellate and supervisory 
jurisdiction. 
 It entertains appeals from the District Forum. 
 It also has original jurisdiction to entertain complaints where the 
value of goods/service and compensation, if any claimed exceeds Rs. 
20 lakhs but does not exceed Rs. 100 lakhs.
62 
 Other powers and authority are similar to those of the District 
Forum. 

iii. National Commission 

 The final authority established under the Act is the National 
Commission. 
 It has original, appellate as well as supervisory jurisdiction. 
 It can hear the appeals from the order passed by the State 
Commission and in its original jurisdiction it will entertain disputes, 
where goods/services and the compensation claimed exceeds Rs.100 
lakhs. 
 It has supervisory jurisdiction over State Commission. 

All the three agencies have powers of a civil court. 

Diagram 1: Channels for grievance redressal 

b) Procedure for filing a complaint 

The procedure for filing a complaint is very simple in all above three 
redressal agencies. There is no fee for filing a complaint or filing an appeal 
whether before the State Commission or National Commission. The 
complaint can be filed by the complainant himself or by his authorised 
agent. It can be filed personally or can even be sent by post. It may be 
noted that no advocate is necessary for the purpose of filing a complaint. 

c) Consumer Forum Orders 

If the forum is satisfied that the goods complained against suffer from any of 
the defects specified in the complaint or that any of the allegations
63 
contained in the complaint about the services are proved, the forum can 
issue an order directing the opposite party to do one or more of the 
following namely, 
i. 
To return to the complainant the price, (or premium in case of 
insurance), the charges paid by the complainant 
ii. To award such amount as compensation to the consumers for any loss or 
injury suffered by the consumer due to negligence of the opposite party 
iii. To remove the defects or deficiencies in the services in question 
iv. To discontinue the unfair trade practice or the restrictive trade 
practice or not to repeat them 
v. To provide for adequate costs to parties 

d) Nature of complaints 

The majority of consumer disputes with the three forums fall in the 
following main categories as far as insurance business are concerned 

i. 
Delay in settlement of claims 
ii. Non-settlement of claims 
iii. Repudiation of claims 
iv. Quantum of loss 
v. Policy terms, conditions etc. 

3. The Insurance Ombudsman 

The Central Government under the powers of the Insurance Regulatory & 
Development Authority Act, 1999 made Insurance Ombudsman Rules 2017 by a 
notification published in the official gazette on 25th April 2017. These rules 
apply to all of insurers and their agents and intermediaries In respect of all 
complaints of all personal lines of insurance, group insurance policies, policies 
issued to sole proprietorship and micro enterprises. Personal lines that is, 
insurances taken in an individual capacity. 

The objective of these rules is to resolve all complaints of all personal lines of 
insurance, group insurance policies, policies issued to sole proprietorship and 
micro enterprises on the part of insurance companies and their agents and 
intermediaries in a cost effective, and impartial manner 

The Ombudsman, by mutual agreement of the insured and the insurer can 
act as a mediator and counsellor within the terms of reference. 

The decision of the Ombudsman, whether to accept or reject the complaint, 
is final. 

a) Complaint to the Ombudsman 

Any complaint made to the Ombudsman should be in writing, signed by the 
insured or his legal heirs, nominee or assignee, addressed to an Ombudsman 
within whose jurisdiction, the insurer has a branch/ office, the facts giving
64 
rise to the complaint, supported by documents, the nature and extent of the 
loss caused to the complainant and the relief sought. 

Complaints can be made to the Ombudsman if: 

i. The complainant had made a previous written representation to the 
insurance company and the insurance company had: 

 Rejected the complaint or 
 The complainant had not received any reply within one month after 
receipt of the complaint by the insurer 

ii. The complainant is not satisfied with the reply given by the insurer 
iii. The complaint is made within one year from the date of rejection by the 
insurance company 
iv. The complaint is not pending in any court or consumer forum or in 
arbitration 

b) Recommendations by the Ombudsman 

There are certain duties/protocols that the Ombudsman is expected to 
follow: 

i. Recommendations should be made within one month of the receipt of 
such a complaint 
ii. The copies should be sent to both the complainant and the insurance 
company 
iii. Recommendations have to be accepted in writing by the complainant 
within 15 days of receipt of such recommendation 
iv. A copy of acceptance letter by the insured should be sent to the insurer 
and his written confirmation sought within 15 days of his receiving such 
acceptance letter 

c) Award 

If the dispute is not settled by intermediation, the Ombudsman will pass an 
award to the insured which he thinks is fair, and is not more than what is 
necessary to cover the loss of the insured. 

The awards by Ombudsman are governed by the following rules: 

i. The award should not be in excess of loss suffered as a direct 
consequence OR more than Rs.30 lakh (including relevant expenses) 
ii. The award should be made within a period of 3 months from the date of 
receipt of all requirements from the complainant and a copy of the 
award to be sent to the complainant and insurer. The complainant shall 
be entitled to such interest at a rate per annum as specified in the 
regulations framed by the IRDAI Act 1999 from the date the claim ought 
to have been settled until date of payment of awarded amount.
65 
iii. The insurer shall comply with the award within 30 days of the receipt of 
the award and intimate compliance of the same to the Ombudsman 
iv. The award of the Ombudsman shall be binding on the insurer. 

Test Yourself 1 

The ______________ has jurisdiction to entertain complaints, where value of 
the goods or services and the compensation claimed is up to Rs. 30 lakhs. 

I. District Forum 
II. State Commission 
III. Zilla Parishad 
IV. National Commission 

Summary 

 
IRDAI has launched an Integrated Grievance Management System (IGMS) 
which acts as a central repository of insurance grievance data and as a tool 
for monitoring grievance redress in the industry. 

 
Consumer disputes redressal agencies are established in each district and 
state and at national level. 

 
As far as insurance business is concerned, the majority of consumer disputes 
fall in categories such as delay in settlement of claims, non-settlement of 
claims, repudiation of claims, quantum of loss and policy terms, conditions 
etc. 

 
The Ombudsman, by mutual agreement of the insured and the insurer can 
act as a mediator and counsellor within the terms of reference. 

 
If the dispute is not settled by intermediation, the Ombudsman will pass 
award to the insured which he thinks is fair, and is not more than what is 
necessary to cover the loss of the insured. 

Key Terms 

1. Integrated Grievance Management System (IGMS) 
2. The Consumer Protection Act, 1986 
3. District Forum 
4. State Commission 
5. National Commission 
6. Insurance Ombudsman
66 

Answers to Test Yourself 

Answer 1 

The correct answer is I. 

The District Forum has jurisdiction to entertain complaints, where value of the 
goods or services and the compensation claimed is up to Rs. 30 lakhs. 

Self-Examination Questions 

Question 1 

Expand the term IGMS. 

I. Insurance General Management System 
II. Indian General Management System 
III. Integrated Grievance Management System 
IV. Intelligent Grievance Management System 

Question 2 

Which of the below consumer grievance redressal agencies would handle 
consumer disputes amounting between Rs. 20 lakhs and Rs. 100 lakhs? 

I. District Forum 
II. State Commission 
III. National Commission 
IV. Zilla Parishad 

Question 3 

Which among the following cannot form the basis for a valid consumer 
complaint? 

I. Shopkeeper charging a price above the MRP for a product 
II. Shopkeeper not advising the customer on the best product in a category 
III. Allergy warning not provided on a drug bottle 
IV. Faulty products 

Question 4 

Which of the below will be the most appropriate option for a customer to lodge 
an insurance policy related complaint? 

I. Police
67 
II. Supreme Court 
III. Insurance Ombudsman 
IV. District Court 

Question 5 

Which of the below statement is correct with regards to the territorial 
jurisdiction of the Insurance Ombudsman? 

I. Insurance Ombudsman has National jurisdiction 
II. Insurance Ombudsman has State jurisdiction 
III. Insurance Ombudsman has District jurisdiction 
IV. Insurance Ombudsman operates only within the specified territorial limits 

Question 6 

How is the complaint to be launched with an insurance ombudsman? 

I. The complaint is to be made in writing 
II. The complaint is to be made orally over the phone 
III. The complaint is to be made orally in a face to face manner 
IV. The complaint is to be made through newspaper advertisement 

Question 7 

What is the time limit for approaching an Insurance Ombudsman? 

I. Within two years of rejection of the complaint by the insurer 
II. Within three years of rejection of the complaint by the insurer 
III. Within one year of rejection of the complaint by the insurer 
IV. Within one month of rejection of the complaint by the insurer 

Question 8 

Which among the following is not a pre-requisite for launching a complaint with 
the Ombudsman? 

I. The complaint must be by an individual on a „Personal Lines‟ insurance 
II. The complaint must be lodged within 1 year of the insurer rejecting the 
complaint 
III. Complainant has to approach a consumer forum prior to the Ombudsman 
IV. The total relief sought must be within an amount of Rs.20 lakhs. 

Question 9 

Are there any fee / charges that need to be paid for lodging the complaint with 
the Ombudsman? 

I. A fee of Rs 100 needs to be paid 
II. No fee or charges need to be paid
68 
III. 20% of the relief sought must be paid as fee 
IV. 10% of the relief sought must be paid as fee 

Question 10 

Can a complaint be launched against a private insurer? 

I. Complaints can be launched against public insurers only 
II. Yes, complaint can be launched against private insurers 
III. Complaint can be launched against private insurers only in the Life Sector 
IV. Complaint can be launched against private insurers only in the Non-Life 
Sector 

Answers to Self-Examination Questions 

Answer 1 

The correct option is III. 

IGMS stands for Integrated Grievance Management System. 

Answer 2 

The correct option is II.