If an individual has to take health insurance coverage quickly without going 
through a long process of medical examinations, waiting periods and processing 
delays, then he can opt for a non-medical underwriting policy. In a non-medical 
underwriting policy, premium rates and sum assured are usually decided on the 
basis of answers to a few health questions mostly based on age, gender, 
smoking class, build etc. The process is speedy but the premiums may be 
relatively higher.
418 
3. Numerical rating method 

This is a process adopted in underwriting, wherein numerical or percentage 
assessments are made on each component of the risk. 

Factors like age, sex, race, occupation, residence, environment, build, habits, 
family and personal history are examined and scored numerically based on pre-
determined criteria. 

4. Underwriting decisions 

The underwriting process is completed when the received information is 
carefully assessed and classified into appropriate risk categories. Based on the 
above tools and his judgment, the underwriter classifies the risk into the 
following categories: 

a) Accept risk at standard rates 
b) Accept risk at an extra premium (loading), though it may not be 
practiced in all companies 
c) Postpone the cover for a stipulated period/term 
d) Decline the cover 
e) Counter offer (either restrict or deny part of the cover) 
f) Impose a higher deductible or Co-pay 
g) Levy permanent exclusion(s) under the policy 

If any illness is permanently excluded, it is endorsed on the policy certificate. 
This becomes an additional exclusion apart from the standard policy exclusion 
and shall form the part of the contract. 

Expert individual risk assessment by underwriters is vital to insurance companies 
as it keeps the insurance system in balance. Underwriting enables insurers to 
group together those with the same level of expected risk and to charge them 
the same premium for the protection they choose. The benefit for the 
policyholder is availability of insurance at a fair and competitive price whereas 
the benefit for an insurer is the ability to maintain the experience of its 
portfolio in line with the morbidity assumptions. 

5. Use of general or standard exclusions 

The majority of policies impose exclusions that apply to all their members. 
These are known as standard exclusions or sometimes referred to as general 
exclusions. Insurers limit their exposure by the implementation of standard 
exclusions. 

The same have been discussed in earlier chapter.
419 
Test Yourself 4 

Which of the following statements about medical underwriting is incorrect? 

I. It involves high cost in collecting and assessing medical reports. 
II. Current health status and age are the key factors in medical underwriting 
for health insurance. 
III. Proposers have to undergo medical and pathological investigations to assess 
their health risk profile. 
IV. Percentage assessment is made on each component of the risk. 

V. 

Diagram 1: Underwriting process
420 

G. Group health insurance 

1. Group health insurance 

Group insurance is underwritten mainly on the law of averages, implying that 
when all members of a standard group are covered under a group health 
insurance policy, the individuals constituting the group cannot anti-select 
against the insurer. Thus, while accepting a group for health insurance, the 
insurers take into consideration the possibility of existence of a few members in 
the group who may have severe and frequent health problems. 

Underwriting of group health insurance requires analyzing the characteristics of 
the group to evaluate whether it falls within the insurance company‟s 
underwriting guidelines as well as the guidelines laid down for group insurance 
by the insurance regulators. 

Standard underwriting process for group health insurance requires evaluating 
the proposed group on the following factors: 

a) Type of group 

b) Group size 

c) Type of industry 

d) Eligible persons for coverage 

e) Whether entire group is being covered or there is an option for members 
to opt out 

f) Level of coverage – whether uniform for all or differently 

g) Composition of the group in terms of sex, age, single or multiple 
locations, income levels of group members, employee turnover rate, 
whether premium paid entirely by the group holder or members are 
required to participate in premium payment 

h) Difference in healthcare costs across regions in case of multiple locations 
spread in different geographical locations 

i) Preference of the group holder for administration of the group insurance 
by a third party administrator (of his choice or one selected by the 
insurer) or by the insurer itself 

j) Past claims experience of the proposed group
421 
Example 

A group of members working in mines or factories is at higher health risk than a 
group of members working in air-conditioned offices. Also the nature of diseases 
(thereby claims) are also likely to be quite different for both groups. 
Therefore, the insurer will price the group health insurance policy accordingly 
in both the cases. 

Similarly to avoid adverse selection in case of groups with high turnover such as 
IT companies, insurers can introduce precautionary criteria requiring employees 
to serve their probationary period before becoming eligible for insurance. 

Due to highly competitive nature of group health insurance business, insurers 
allow substantial flexibility and customization in benefits of the group insurance 
plans. In employer-employee group insurance plans, the benefits design is 
usually developed over time and used as an employee retention tool by the 
human resources department of the employer. Often, the flexibility is the result 
of competition among insurers to match or improve the benefits of the existing 
group insurance plan given by another insurer to capture and shift business. 

2. Underwriting other than employer- employee groups 

Employer-employee groups are traditionally the most common groups offered 
group health insurance. However, as health insurance gains acceptance as an 
effective vehicle of financing healthcare expenditure, different types of group 
formations have now developed. In such a scenario, it is important for group 
health insurance underwriters to take into consideration the character of the 
group composition while underwriting the group. 

In addition to employee-employer groups, insurers have provided group health 
insurance coverage to varied type of groups such as: labour unions, trusts and 
societies, 
multiple-employer 
groups, 
franchisee 
dealers, 
professional 
associations, clubs and other brotherhood organizations. 

Governments in different countries have been buyers of group health insurance 
coverage for poorer sections of the society. In India, governments both at the 
central and state level have aggressively been sponsoring group health 
insurance schemes for the poor e.g. RSBY, Yeshaswini etc. 

Though basic underwriting considerations for such diverse groups are similar to 
generally accepted group underwriting factors, additional aspects include: 

a) Size of the group (small group size may suffer from frequent changes) 
b) Different levels of healthcare cost in different geographical regions 
c) Risk of adverse selection in case all group constituents do not participate 
in the group health insurance plan 
d) Continuation of members in the group in the policy 
There has been a growth in irregular types of group formations just to take 
advantage of such group health insurance benefits at cheap prices, called
422 
„groups of convenience‟. The insurance regulator IRDA has therefore issued 
group insurance guidelines with a view to regulate the approach to be adopted 
by insurers in dealing with various groups. Such non-employer groups include: 

a) Employer welfare associations 
b) Holders of credit cards issued by a specific company 
c) Customers of a particular business where insurance is offered as an add-
on benefit 
d) Borrowers of a bank and professional associations or societies 

The rationale of the group insurance guidelines is to restrict formation of groups 
for the sole purpose of availing insurance with advantage of flexible design, 
coverage of benefits not available on individual policies and cost savings. It has 
been observed that such „groups of convenience‟ have often led to adverse 
selection against the insurers and eventually high claim ratios. Group insurance 
guidelines by the regulatory authority, thus, help in responsible market conduct 
by the insurers. They instill discipline in underwriting by insurance companies 
and also in canvassing group insurance schemes by setting up administration 
standards for group schemes.
423 
H. Underwriting of Overseas Travel Insurance 

Since the main cover under Overseas Travel Insurance policies is the health 
cover, the underwriting would follow the pattern for health insurance in 
general. 

The premium rating and acceptance would as per individual company guidelines 
but a few important considerations are given below: 

1. Premium rate would depend on the age of the proposer and the duration 
of foreign travel. 

2. As medical treatment is costly overseas, the premium rates are normally 
much higher compared to domestic health insurance policies. 

3. Even among the foreign countries, USA and Canada premium is the 
highest. 

4. Care should be taken to rule out the possibility of a proposer using the 
policy to take medical treatment abroad and hence the existence of any 
pre-existing disease must be carefully considered at the proposal stage.
424 
I. Underwriting of Personal Accident Insurance 

The underwriting considerations for personal accident policies are discussed 
below: 

Rating 

In personal accident insurance, the main factor considered is the occupation of 
the insured. Generally speaking exposure to personal accidents at home, on the 
street etc. is the same for all persons. But the risks associated with profession 
or occupation varies in accordance with the nature of work performed. For 
example, an office manager is less exposed to risk at work than a civil engineer 
working at a site where a building is being constructed. 

It is not practical, to fix a rate for each profession or occupation. Hence, 
occupations are classified into groups, each group reflecting, more or less, 
similar risk exposure. The following system of classification is simple and found 
to be feasible in practice. Individual companies may have their own basis of 
classification. 

Classification of Risk 

On the basis of occupation, the risks associated with the insured person may be 
classified into three groups: 

 
Risk group I 
Accountants, Doctors, Lawyers, Architects, Consulting Engineers, 
Teachers, Bankers, persons engaged in administration functions, persons 
primarily engaged in occupations of similar hazards. 

 
Risk group II 
Builders, Contractors and Engineers engaged in superintending functions 
only, Veterinary Doctors, paid drivers of motor cars and light motor 
vehicles and persons engaged in occupation of similar hazards. 
All persons engaged in manual labour (except those falling under Group 
III), cash carrying employees, garage and motor Mechanics, Machine 
operators, Drivers of trucks or lorries and other heavy vehicles, 
professional athletes and sportsmen, woodworking Machinists and 
persons engaged in occupations of similar hazards. 

 
Risk group III 
Persons working in underground mines, explosives magazines, workers 
involved in electrical installation with high tension supply, Jockeys, 
circus personnel, persons engaged in activities like racing on wheels or 
horseback, big game hunting, mountaineering, winter sports, skiing, ice 
hockey, ballooning, hang gliding, river rafting, polo and persons engaged 
in occupations / activities of similar hazard.
425 
Risk groups are also known in the form of „Normal‟, „Medium‟ and „High‟ 
respectively. 

Age Limits 

The minimum and maximum age for being covered and renewed varies from 
company to company. Generally a band of 5 years to 70 years is the norm. 
However, in case of persons who already have a cover, policies may be renewed 
after they complete 70 years but up to the age of 80 subject to a loading of the 
renewal premium. 

No medical examination is usually required for renewal or fresh cover. 

Medical Expenses 

The medical expenses cover is as follows: 

 
A personal accident policy can be extended by endorsement, on payment 
of extra premium to cover medical expenses incurred by the insured in 
connection with the accidental bodily injury. 

 
These benefits are in addition to the other benefits under the policies. 

 
It is not necessary that person has to be hospitalised. 

War and Allied Risks 

War risk cover may be covered to Indian personnel / experts working in foreign 
countries on civilian duties with additional premium. 

 
P.A. policies issued during peace time or normal period would be at say 
50 percent extra over the normal rate (i.e. 150 percent of the normal 
rate.) 

 
P.A. policies issued during abnormal/ apprehensive period (i.e. during 
the period when warlike conditions have already occurred or are 
imminent in foreign country/i.e. where the Indian personnel are working 
on civilian duties) at say 150 percent extra over the normal rate (i.e. 250 
percent of the normal rate) 

The Proposal Form 

The form elicits information on the following: 

 
Personal details 
 
Physical condition 
 
Habits and pastimes 
 
Other or previous insurances 
 
Previous accidents or illness
426 
 
Selection of benefits and sum insured 
 
Declaration 

The above required details can be explained as follows: 

 
Personal details relate to, inter alia, age, height and weight, full 
description of occupation and average monthly income. 

 
Age will show whether the proposer is within the limits of age for 
entrants for the policy desired. Weight and height should be compared 
with a table of average weight for sex, height and age and further 
investigation would be made if the proposer is say 15 percent or more 
over or under the average. 

 
Physical condition details relate to any physical infirmity or defect, 
chronic diseases etc. 

 
Proposers who have lost a limb or the sight of an eye may only be 
accepted on special terms in approved cases. They constitute abnormal 
risks because they are “less able to avoid certain types of accidents and 
in view of the fact that if the remaining arm or leg is injured or the sight 
or the remaining eye is affected, the degree and length of disablement is 
likely to be much greater than normal. 

 
Diabetes may retard recovery as the wound may not heal quickly and the 
disablement may be unduly prolonged. The medical history of the 
proposer must be examined in order to determine whether and to what 
extent injuries or illnesses may affect the future accident risks. There 
are many complaints of such an obviously serious nature as to make the 
risk uninsurable, e.g. valvular disease of the heart. 

 
Hazardous pastimes like mountaineering, polo, motor racing, acrobatics 
etc., require extra premium. 

Sum Insured 

The sum insured in a personal accident policy has to be fixed with caution, as 
they are benefit policies and not subject to strict indemnity. Care should be 
taken to consider income derived through „gainful employment‟. In other words, 
income which will not be affected by accident to the proposer should not be 
considered while determining the sum insured. 

As practices of fixing the S.I varies among insures/underwriters, the exact 
amount for which the cover could be granted depends on the underwriters. 
However the general practice that the cover granted should not exceed the 
equivalent of 72 months / 6 years‟ earning of the insured.
427 
This restriction is not strictly applied if the policy is for capital benefits only. 
For temporary total disablement cover however it should not happen that in the 
event of compensation payable, the same is disproportionate to his earnings 
during the same period. If the cover is for weekly compensation for TTD, the 
sum insured usually does not exceed twice his/her annual income. 

While giving cover to persons who are not gainfully employed e.g. housewives, 
students etc. the insurers make sure that they provide for capital benefits only 
and that no weekly compensation is provided for. 

Family Package Cover 

For children and non-earning spouse the cover is limited to death and 
permanent disablement (total or partial). However, based on individual 
company‟s norms the Table of Benefits may be considered. Some Companies 
allow TTD cover to non-earning spouse also up to a particular limit. 

A discount of 5 percent is usually granted on the gross premium. 

Group Policies 

A group discount is allowed off the premium, if the number of insured person 
exceeds a certain number say 100. Group policy however may be issued when 
number is smaller, say 25 but without any discount. 

Normally, policies on unnamed basis are issued only to very valued clients, 
where the identity of the member is clearly ascertainable beyond doubt. 

Group discount criteria 

Group policies should be issued only in respect of the named groups. For the 
purpose of availing of group discount and other benefits, the proposed “Group” 
should fall clearly under any one of the following categories: 

 
Employer – employee relationship including dependents of the 
employee 
 
Pre identified segments / groups where the premium is to be paid by 
the State / Central Governments 
 
Members of a registered co-operative society 
 
Members of registered service clubs 
 
Holders of credit card of banks / Diners / Master / Visa 
 
Holders of deposit certificates issued by banks / NBFC‟s 
 
Shareholders of banks / public limited companies 

In case of proposals relating to any further category different from the above 
categories, they may be deliberated and decided upon by the technical 
department of the respective insurers.
428 
No group discount can be offered on the „anticipated‟ group size. Group 
discount is to be considered and worked out only on the actual number of 
members registered in the „Group‟ at the time of taking out the policy. It can 
be reviewed at renewals. 
Sum insured 

The sum insured may be fixed for specific amounts separately for each insured 
person or it may be linked to emoluments payable to the insured persons. 

The principle of „All or None‟ applies in a group insurance. Additions and 
deletions are made thereto with pro rata additional premium or refund. 

Premium 

Varying rates of premium are applicable to named employees as per the 
classification of risks and the benefits selected. Thus rates will vary according 
to the occupation of persons covered. 

Example 

The same rate will apply to well defined groups of employee all of whom, 
broadly speaking follow the same type of occupation. 

In respect of unnamed employees the employer is required to declare the 
number of employees in each classification based on authentic records 
maintained by him. 

Premium rates for named member of an association, clubs etc. apply according 
to the classification of risk. 

When the membership is of a general nature and not restricted to any particular 
occupation, underwriters use their discretion in applying the rates. 

On-duty covers 

The cover provided during the on-duty hours is as follows: 

 
If P.A cover is required only for the restricted hours of duty (and not for 
24 hours a day), a reduced premium say 75 percent of the appropriate 
premium is charged. 

 
The cover applies to accident to the employees arising out of and in the 
course of employment only. 

Off-duty covers 

If cover is required only for the restricted hours, when the employee is not at 
work and/or not on official duty, the reduced premium of say 50 percent of the 
appropriate premium may be charged.
429 
Exclusion of death cover 

It is possible to issue group P.A. policies excluding the death benefit, subject to 
individual company guidelines. 

Group discount and Bonus/Malus 

Since a large number of persons are covered under one policy, there is less 
administrative work and expense. Besides, usually all members of the group will 
be insured and there will be no adverse selection against the insurers. Hence, a 
discount in premium is allowed, according to a scale. 

Rating under renewal of group policies is determined with reference to the 
claims experience. 

 
Favourable experience is rewarded with a discount in the renewal 
premium (bonus) 

 
Adverse experience is penalised by loading of renewal premium (malus), 
according to a scale 

 
Normal rates will apply for renewal if the claims experience is, say, 70 
percent 

Proposal form 

 
It is customary to dispense the forms for completion by the members and 
to have one document only, completed by the insured. 

 
He is required to make a declaration that no member suffers from a 
physical infirmity or defect that would render his participation 
unacceptable. 

 
Sometimes even this precaution is waived, it being understood and/or 
made clear by endorsement that disability prior to the commencement 
of cover and also any cumulative effect as a result of such disability 
stand excluded. 

However the practice may vary among the companies.
430 
Test Yourself 5 

1) In a group health insurance, any of the individual constituting the group 
could anti-select against the insurer. 
2) Group health insurance provides coverage only to employer-employee 
groups. 

I. Statement 1 is true and statement 2 is false 
II. Statement 2 is true and statement 1 is false 
III. Statement 1 and statement 2 are true 
IV. Statement 1 and statement 2 are false 

Information 

As part of the risk management process, the underwriter uses two methods of 
transferring his risks especially in case of large group policies: 

Coinsurance: This refers to the acceptance of a risk by more than one insurer. 
Normally, this is done by way of allocating a percentage of the risk to each 
insurer. Thus the policy may be accepted by two insurers say, Insurer A with a 
60% share and Insurer B with a 40% share. Normally, insurer A would be the lead 
insurer handling all matters relating to the policy, including issuance of the 
policy and settlement of claims. Insurer B would reimburse insurer A for 40% of 
the claims paid. 

Reinsurance: The insurer accepts risks of various types and sizes. How can he 
protect his various risks? He does this by re-insuring his risks with other 
insurance companies and this is called reinsurance. Reinsurers therefore accept 
risks of insurers either by way of standing arrangements called treaties or on a 
case to case basis called facultative reinsurance. Reinsurance is done word-wide 
and hence it spreads risk far and wide.
431 
Summary 

a) Health insurance is based on the concept of morbidity which is defined as 
the risk of a person falling ill or sick. 

b) Underwriting is the process of risk selection and risk pricing. 

c) Underwriting is required to strike a proper balance between risk and 
business thereby maintaining the competitiveness and yet profitability for 
the organisation. 

d) Some of the factors which affect a person‟s morbidity are age, gender, 
habits, occupation, build, family history, past illness or surgery, current 
health status and place of residence. 

e) The purpose of underwriting to prevent adverse selection against the insurer 
and also ensure proper classification and equity among risks. 

f) The agent is the first level underwriter as he is in the best position to know 
the prospective client to be insured. 

g) The core principles of insurance are: utmost good faith, insurable interest, 
indemnity, contribution, subrogation and proximate cause. 

h) The key tools for underwriting are: proposal form, age proof, financial 
documents, medical reports and sales reports. 

i) Medical underwriting is a process which is used by the insurance companies 
to determine the health status of an individual applying for health insurance 
policy. 

j) Non-medical underwriting is a process where the proposer is not required to 
undergo any medical examination. 

k) Numerical rating method is a process adopted in underwriting, wherein 
numerical or percentage assessments are made on each aspect of the risk. 

l) The underwriting process is completed when the received information is 
carefully assessed and classified into appropriate risk categories. 

m) Group insurance is mainly underwritten based on the law of averages, 
implying that when all members of a standard group are covered under a 
group health insurance policy, the individuals constituting the group cannot 
anti-select against the insurer.
432 
Answers to Test Yourself 

Answer 1 

The correct option is III. 

Underwriting is the process of risk selection and risk pricing. 

Answer 2 

The correct option is III. 

The principle of utmost good faith in underwriting has to be followed by both 
the insurer and the insured. 

Answer 3 

The correct option is I. 

Insurable interest refers to the pecuniary or the financial interest of a person in 
the asset he is going to get insured and can suffer financial loss in the event of 
any damage to such asset. 

Answer 4 

The correct option is IV. 

Percentage and numerical assessment is made on each component of the risk in 
numerical rating method, and not medical underwriting method. 

Answer 5 

The correct option is IV. 

In a group health insurance, when all members of a group are covered under a 
group health insurance policy, the individuals constituting the group cannot 
anti-select against the insurer. 

In addition to employee-employer groups, insurers have provided group health 
insurance coverage to varied type of groups such as: labour unions, trusts and 
societies, professional associations, clubs and other fraternal organisations.
433 

Self-Examination Questions 

Question 1 

Which of the following factor does not affect the morbidity of an individual? 

I. Gender 
II. Spouse job 
III. Habits 
IV. Residence location 

Question 2 

According to the principle of indemnity, the insured is paid for __________. 

I. The actual losses to the extent of the sum insured 
II. The sum insured irrespective of the amount actually spent 
III. A fixed amount agreed between both the parties 
IV. The actual losses irrespective of the sum assured 

Question 3 

The first and the primary source of information about an applicant, for the 
underwriter is his ________________. 

I. Age proof documents 
II. Financial documents 
III. Previous medical records 
IV. Proposal form 

Question 4 

The underwriting process is completed when ___________________. 

I. All the critical information related to the health and personal details of the 
proposer are collected through the proposal form 
II. All the medical examinations and tests of the proposer are completed 
III. The received information is carefully assessed and classified into 
appropriate risk categories 
IV. The policy is issued to the proposer after risk selection and pricing.
434 
Question 5 

Which of the following statements about the numerical rating method is 
incorrect? 

I. Numerical rating method provides greater speed in the handling of a large 
business with the help of trained personnel. 
II. Analysis of difficult or doubtful cases is not possible on the basis of 
numerical points without medical referees or experts. 
III. This method can be used by persons without any specific knowledge of 
medical science. 
IV. It ensures consistency between the decisions of different underwriters. 

Answers to Self-Examination Questions 

Answer 1 

The correct option is II. 

The morbidity of an individual is not affected by their spouse‟s job, though their 
own occupation is one of the important factors which can affect their 
morbidity. 

Answer 2 

The correct option is I. 

According to the principle of indemnity, insured is compensated for the actual 
costs or losses, but to the extent of the sum insured. 

Answer 3 

The correct option is IV. 

The primary source of information about an applicant, for the underwriter is his 
proposal form or application form, in which all the critical information related 
to the health and personal details of the proposer are collected. 

Answer 4 

The correct option is III. 

The underwriting process is completed when the received information is 
carefully assessed and classified into appropriate risk categories.
435 

Answer 5 

The correct answer is II. 

A more careful analysis of difficult or doubtful cases is made possible by 
numerical rating method because past experience with reference to the 
doubtful points is expressed numerically in terms of a known standard and 
shadings.
436 
CHAPTER 21 

HEALTH INSURANCE CLAIMS 
Chapter Introduction 

In this chapter we will discuss about claim management process in health 
insurance, documentation required and the process of claim reserving. Apart 
from this we will also look into claims management under personal accident 
insurance and understand the role of TPAs. 

Learning Outcomes 

A. Claims management in insurance 
B. Management of health insurance claims 
C. Documentation in health insurance claims 
D. Claims reserving 
E. Role of third party administrators (TPA) 
F. Claims management – personal accident 
G. Claims management- Overseas travel insurance 

After studying this chapter, you should be able to: 

a) Explain the various stakeholders in insurance claims 
b) Describe how health insurance claims are managed 
c) Discuss the various documents required for settlement of health insurance 
claims 
d) Explain how reserves for claims are provided for by insurers 
e) Discuss personal accident claims 
f) Understand the concept and role of TPAs
437 

A. Claims management in insurance 

It is very well understood that insurance is a „promise‘ and the policy is a 
„witness‘ to that promise. The occurrence of an insured event leading to a 
claim under the policy is the true test of that promise. How well an insurer 
performs is evaluated by how well it keeps its claims promises. One of the key 
rating factors in insurance is the claims paying ability of the insurance company. 

1. Stakeholders in claim process 

Before we look in detail at how claims are managed, we need to understand 
who are the interested parties in the claims process. 

Diagram 1: Stakeholders in claim process 

Customer 
The person who buys insurance is the first stakeholder and 
„receiver of the claim‟. 
Owners 
Owners of the insurance company have a big stake as the 
„payers of the claims‟. Even if the claims are met from the 
policy holders‟ funds, in most cases, it is they who are 
liable to keep the promise.
438 
Underwriters 
Underwriters within an insurance company and across all 
insurers have the responsibility to understand the claims 
and design the products, decide policy terms, conditions 
and pricing etc. 
Regulator 
The regulator (Insurance Regulatory and Development 
Authority of India) is a key stakeholder in its objective to: 
 Maintain order in the insurance environment 
 Protect policy holders‟ interest 
 Ensure long term financial health of insurers. 
Third Party 
Administrators 
Service intermediaries known as Third Party Administrators, 
who process health insurance claims. 
Insurance agents 
/ brokers 
Insurance agents / brokers not only sell policies but are 
also expected to service the customers in the event of a 
claim. 
Providers / 
Hospitals 
They ensure that the customer gets a smooth claim 
experience, especially when the hospital is on the panel of 
the TPA the Insurer to provide cashless hospitalization. 

Thus managing claims well means managing the objectives of the each of these 
stakeholders related to the claims. Of course, it may happen that some of these 
objectives can conflict with each other. 

2. Role of claims management in insurance company 

As per industry data- “the health insurance loss ratio of various insurers ranges 
from 65% to above 120%, with major part of the market operating at above 100% 
loss ratio”. Most companies are making losses in health insurance business. 

This means that there is a great need to adopt sound underwriting practices and 
efficient management of claims to bring better results to the company and the 
policyholders. 

Test Yourself 1 

Who among the following is not a stakeholder in insurance claim process? 

I. Insurance company shareholders 
II. Human Resource Department 
III. Regulator 
IV. TPA
439 
B. Management of health insurance claims 

1. Challenges in health insurance 

It is important to understand the peculiar features of the health insurance 
portfolio in depth so that health claims can be effectively managed. These are: 

a) Majority of the policies are for hospitalization indemnity where the 
subject matter covered is a human being. This brings forth emotional 
issues that are not normally faced in other classes of insurance. 

b) India presents very peculiar patterns of illnesses, approach to treatment 
and follow up. These result in some people being excessively cautious 
with some others being unworried about their illness and treatment. 

c) Health insurance can be purchased by an individual, a group such as a 
corporate organization or through a retail selling channel like a bank. 
This results in the product being sold as a standard commodity at one 
extreme while being tailored to satisfy needs of the customer at the 
other. 

d) Health insurance depends on the act of being hospitalized, to trigger a 
claim under the policy. However, there is great difference in the 
availability, specialization, treatment methods, billing patterns and 
charges of all health service providers whether doctors, surgeons or 
hospitals which make it very difficult to assess claims. 

e) The discipline of healthcare is the fastest developing one. New diseases 
and conditions keep occurring resulting in development of new 
treatment methods. Examples of this are key-hole surgeries, laser 
treatments, etc. 
This makes health insurance more technical and the skills to handle the 
insurance claims for such procedure needs constant improvement. 

f) More than all these factors, the fact that a human body cannot be 
standardized adds a completely new dimension. Two people could 
respond differently to the same treatment for the same illness or require 
different treatments or varying periods of hospitalization. 

The portfolio of health insurance is growing rapidly. The challenge of such rapid 
growth is the huge number of products. There are hundreds of health insurance 
products in the market and even within a company one can find many different 
products. Each product and its variant has its peculiarity and therefore needs to 
be studied before a claim can be handled. 

Growth of the health portfolio also brings about the challenge of numbers – a 
company selling 100,000 health policies to retail customers covering say, 
300,000 members under these policies, has to be prepared to service about 
20,000 claims at least! With the expectation of cashless service and speedy
440 
settlement of claims, organizing health insurance claims department is a 
significant challenge. 

Typically health insurance policies written in India cover hospitalization 
anywhere within the country. The team handling claims must understand the 
practices across the country to be able to appreciate the claim presented. 

The health claims manager meets these challenges using expertise, experience 
and various tools available to him. 

In the final analysis, health insurance offers the satisfaction of having assisted a 
person who is in need and is undergoing the physical and emotional stress of 
illness of himself or his family. 

Efficient claims management ensures that right claim is paid to right person 
at the right time. 

2. 
Claim process in health insurance 

A claim may be serviced either by the insurance company itself or through the 
services of a Third Party Administrator (TPA) authorized by the insurance 
company. 

From the time a claim is made known to the insurer / TPA to the time the 
payment is made as per the policy terms, the health claim passes through a set 
of well-defined steps, each having its own relevance. 

The processes detailed below are in specific reference to health insurance 
(hospitalization) indemnity products which form the major part of health 
insurance business. 

The general process and supporting documents for a claim under fixed benefit 
product or critical illness or daily cash product etc. would be quite similar, 
except for the fact that such products may not come with cashless facility. 

The claim under an indemnity policy could be a: 

a) 
Cashless claim 

The customer does not pay the expenses at the time of admission or 
treatment. The network hospital provides the services based on a pre-
approval from the insurer/TPA and later submits the documents to the 
insurer/TPA for settlement of the claim.
441 
b) 
Reimbursement claim 

The customer pays the hospital from his own resources and then files his 
claim with Insurer/TPA for payment of the admissible claim. 

In both cases, the basic steps remain the same. 

Diagram 2: Claim process broadly comprises of following steps (not in exact 
order)
442 
a) Intimation 

Claim intimation is the first instance of contact between the customer and 
the claims team. The customer could inform the company that he is 
planning to avail a hospitalization or the intimation would be made after the 
hospitalization has taken place, especially in case of emergency admission 
to a hospital. 

Till recently, the act of intimation of a claim event was a formality. 
However, recently insurers have started insisting on the intimation of claim 
as soon as practicable. Typically it is required before hospitalization in case 
of planned admission, and within 24 hours of hospitalization in case of an 
emergency. 

The timely availability of information about hospitalization helps the 
Insurer/TPA to verify that the hospitalization of the customer is genuine and 
there is no impersonation or fraud and sometimes, to negotiate the charges. 

Intimation earlier meant „a letter written, submitted and acknowledged‟ or 
by fax. With development in communication and technology, intimation is 
now possible through call centres run by insurers/TPAs open 24 hours as well 
as through the internet and e-mail. 

b) Registration