Diagram 1: Risk classification 

i. 
Standard lives 

These consist of those whose anticipated mortality corresponds to the 
standard lives represented by the mortality table. 

ii. Preferred risks 

These are the ones whose anticipated mortality is significantly lower than 
standard lives and hence could be charged a lower premium. 

iii. Substandard lives 

These are the ones whose anticipated mortality is higher than the average 
or standard lives, but are still considered to be insurable. They may be 
accepted for insurance with higher (or extra) premiums or subjected to 
certain restrictions. 

iv. Declined lives 

These are the ones whose impairments and anticipated extra mortality are 
so great that they could not be provided insurance coverage at an affordable 
cost. Sometimes an individual‟s proposal may also be temporarily declined if 
he or she has been exposed to a recent medical event, like an operation. 

3. Selection process 

Underwriting or the selection process may be said to take place at two levels: 

 At field level 
 At underwriting department level
270 
Diagram 2: Underwriting or the selection process 

a) Field or Primary level 

Field level underwriting may also be known as primary underwriting. It 
includes information gathering by an agent or company representative to 
decide whether an applicant is suitable for granting insurance coverage. The 
agent plays a critical role as primary underwriter. He is in the best position 
to know the life to be insured. 

Many insurance companies may require that agents complete a statement or 
a confidential report, asking for specific information, opinion and 
recommendations to be provided by the agent with respect to the proposed 
life. 

A similar kind of report, which has been called as Moral Hazard report, may 
also be sought from an official of the life insurance company. These reports 
typically cover the occupation, income and financial standing and reputation 
of the proposed life. 

Fraud monitoring and role of agent as primary underwriter 

Much of the decision with regard to selection of a risk depends on the facts that 
have been disclosed by the proposer in the proposal form. It may be difficult 
for an underwriter who is sitting in the underwriting department to know 
whether these facts are untrue and have been fraudulently misrepresented with 
deliberate intent to deceive. 

The agent plays a significant role here. He or she is in the best position to 
ascertain that the facts that have been represented are true, since the agent 
has direct and personal contact with the proposed life and can thus monitor if 
any wilful non - disclosure or misrepresentation has been made with an intent 
to mislead. 

b) Underwriting department level 

The second level of underwriting is at the department or office level. It 
involves specialists and persons who are proficient in such work and who
271 
consider all the relevant data on the case to decide whether to accept a 
proposal for life insurance and on what terms. 

4. Methods of underwriting 
Diagram 3: Methods of Underwriting 

Underwriters may use two types of methods for the purpose: 

Judgment Method 
Numerical Method 
Under this method subjective 
judgment is used, especially when 
deciding 
on 
a 
case 
that 
is 
complex. 
Under this method underwriters 
assign positive rating points for all 
negative 
or 
adverse 
factors 
(negative points for any positive or 
favourable factors). 
Example: Deciding whether to 
give insurance to someone who 
has acute diabetes and on what 
terms 

In such situations, the department 
may get the expert opinion of a 
medical doctor who is also called 
a medical referee. 
The total number of points so 
assigned will decide how much 
Extra Mortality Rating (also called 
EMR) it has been given. Higher the 
EMR, more substandard the life is. If 
the EMR is very high, insurance may 
even be declined. 

Underwriting decisions 
Diagram 4: Underwriting decisions
272 

Let us now consider the various kinds of decisions that underwriters may take 
with regard to a life proposed for underwriting 

a) Acceptance at ordinary rates (OR) is the most common decision. This 
rating indicates that the risk is accepted at the same rate of premium as 
would apply to an ordinary or standard life. 

b) Acceptance with an extra: This is the most common way of dealing with 
the large majority of sub-standard risks. It involves charging an extra 
over the tabular rate of premium. 

c) Acceptance with a lien on the sum assured: A lien is a kind of hold 
which the life insurance company can exercise (in part or whole) on the 
amount of benefit it has to pay in the event of a claim. 
Example: It may be imposed in case the life proposed for insurance has 
suffered and recovered from certain disease like TB. Lien implies that if 
the life assured dies from a specified cause (for example relapse of the 
TB) within a given period, only a decreased amount of death benefit may 
be payable. 

d) Acceptance with a restrictive clause: For certain kinds of hazards a 
restrictive clause may be applied which limits death benefit in the event 
of death under certain circumstances. 
Example is a pregnancy clause imposed on pregnant ladies that limits 
insurance payable in the event of pregnancy related deaths occurring 
within say three months of delivery. 

e) Decline or postpone: Finally, a life insurance underwriter may decide to 
decline or reject a proposal for insurance. This would happen when 
there are certain health /other features which are so adverse that they 
considerably magnify the incidence of the risk. 
Example: An individual who suffers from cancer and has little chance of 
remission, would be a candidate for rejection, 

Similarly in some cases it may be prudent to postpone acceptance of the 
risk until such time as the situation has improved and become more 
favourable. 

Example 

A lady who has just had a hysterectomy operation may be asked to wait for 
a few months before insurance on her life is allowed, to allow any post 
operation complications that may have arisen to disappear.
273 
Test Yourself 1 

Which of the following cases is likely to be declined or postponed by a life 
insurer? 

I. Healthy 18 year old 
II. An obese person 
III. A person suffering from AIDS 
IV. Housewife with no income of her own
274 

B. Non-medical underwriting 

1. Non-medical underwriting 

A large number of life insurance proposals may typically get selected for 
insurance without conducting a medical examination to check the insurability of 
a life to be insured. Such cases are termed as non-medical proposals. 

The case for non-medical underwriting lies in the finding that medical 
examinations bring out adverse features only in a small proportion (say one 
tenth) of the cases. The rest can be found out from the answers given in the 
proposal or the proposed life‟s leave records and other documents. 

Conducting a medical examination by a qualified doctor would require that fees 
be paid to the doctor. The cost that can be saved by not conducting such 
examination is found to be much more than the loss that the life insurer may 
suffer on account of extra death claims arising as a result of bypassing a 
medical test. Life insurers have hence adopted the practice of granting 
insurance without insisting on a medical examination. 

2. Conditions for non-medical underwriting 

However non-medical underwriting calls for certain conditions to be followed. 

i. 
Firstly only certain categories of females, like working women, may be 
eligible. 

ii. Upper limits on sum insured may be imposed. For example, any case 
having a sum assured beyond five lakhs may need to be subjected to a 
medical examination. 

iii. Age at entry limits may be imposed – for example, anyone above 40 or 
45 years of age has to compulsorily get a medical examination done. 

iv. Restriction being imposed with regard to certain plans of insurance – 
term insurance for example may not be allowed under non-medical 
category. 

v. Maximum term of insurance may be limited to twenty years /up to age 
60. 

vi. Class of lives: Non-medical insurance may also be allowed to certain 
specific categories of individuals, for instance, non-medical special is 
provided to employees of reputed firms – having one year service. These 
companies have proper leave records and may also have periodic medical 
examinations so that the employee‟s medical status can be easily 
verified.
275 
3. Rating factors in underwriting 

Rating factors refer to various aspects related to financial situation, life style, 
habits, family history, personal history of health and other personal 
circumstances in the prospective insured‟s life that may pose a hazard and 
increase the risk. Underwriting involves identifying these hazards and their 
likely impact and classifying the risk accordingly. 

Let us understand how the characteristics of an individual life have an impact 
on the risk. Broadly these may be divided into two – those which contribute to 
moral hazard and those which contribute to physical [medical] hazards. Life 
insurance companies often divide their underwriting into categories accordingly. 
Factors like income, occupation, lifestyle and habits, which contribute to moral 
hazard, are assessed as part of financial underwriting, while medical aspects of 
health are appraised as part of medical underwriting. 

a) Female insurance 

Women generally have greater longevity than men. However they may face 
some problems with respect to moral hazard. This is because many women 
in Indian society are still vulnerable to male domination and social 
exploitation. Evils like dowry deaths are prevalent even today. Another 
factor which can affect longevity of women can arise from problems 
connected with pregnancy. 

Insurability of women is governed by need for insurance and capacity to pay 
premiums. Insurance companies may thus decide to grant full insurance only 
to those who have earned income of their own and may impose limits on 
other categories of women. Similarly some conditions may be levied on 
pregnant women. 

b) Minors 

Minors have no contracting power of their own. Hence a proposal on the life 
of a minor has to be submitted by another person who is related to the 
minor in the capacity of a parent or legal guardian. It would also be 
necessary to ascertain the need for insurance, since minors usually have no 
earned income of their own. 

Three conditions would generally be sought when considering insurance for 
minors: 

i. 
Whether they have a properly developed physique 
Poor growth of physique can arise as a result of malnutrition or other 
health problems posing grave risks. 

ii. Proper family history and personal history 
If there are adverse indicators here, it may pose risks.
276 
iii. Whether the family is adequately insured 
Insurance of minors is generally pursued by families having a culture of 
insurance. One would thus need to be alert when receiving a proposal on 
a child‟s life where the parents have not been insured. The underwriter 
would need to ascertain why such insurance has not been taken. Amount 
of insurance is also linked to that of parents. 

c) Large sums assured 

An underwriter needs to be wary when the amount of insurance is very large 
relative to annual income of the proposed insured. Generally sum assured 
may be assumed to be around ten to twelve times one‟s annual income. If 
the ratio is much higher than this, it raises the possibility of selection 
against the insurer. 

Example 

If an individual has an annual income of Rs. 5 lakhs and proposes for a life 
insurance cover of Rs. 3 crores, it raises a cause for concern. 

Typically concerns can arise in such instances because of the possibility that 
such a large amount of insurance is being proposed in anticipation of suicide 
or as a result of expected deterioration in health. A third reason for such 
large sums could be excessive mis-selling by the sales person. 

Large sums assured would also imply proportionately large premiums and 
raise the question whether the payment of such premiums would be 
continued. In general it would be thus prudent to limit the amount of 
insurance so that the premium payable is a maximum of say one third of an 
individual‟s annual income. 

d) Age 

As we have seen elsewhere in this course, the mortality risk is closely 
related to age. The underwriter needs to be careful when considering 
insurance for people who are of advanced ages. 

Example 

If the insurance is being proposed for the first time after age 50, there is a 
need to suspect moral hazard and enquire about why such insurance was not 
taken earlier. 

We must also note that chances of occurrence of degenerative diseases like 
diseases of the heart and kidney failure increase with age and become high 
at older ages. 
Life insurers may also seek for some special reports when proposals are 
submitted for high sums assured / advanced ages or a combination of both.
277 
Example 

Examples of such reports are the ECG; the EEG; X-Ray of the chest and Blood 
Sugar test. These tests may reveal deeper insights about the health of the 
proposed life than the answers given in the proposal or an ordinary medical 
examination can provide. 

An important part of the underwriting process is admission of age, after 
verifying the proof of age. There are two types of age proofs 

 Standard 
 Non-standard 

Standard age proofs are normally issued by a public authority. Instances are 

 the birth certificate which is issued by a municipality or other 
government body; 
 the school leaving certificate; 
 the passport; and 
 the employers‟ certificate 

Where such proofs are not available, the proposer may be asked to bring a 
non-standard age proof. Examples of the latter are the horoscope; a self-
declaration 

When a standard age proof is not available, non-standard age proof should 
not be accepted readily. Often, life insurers would impose certain 
restrictions with respect to plan of insurance, term of assurance; maximum 
maturity age and maximum sum assured. 

e) Moral hazard 

Moral hazard may be said to exist when certain circumstances or 
characteristics of an individual‟s financial situation, lifestyle and habits, 
reputation and mental health indicate that he or she may intentionally 
engage in actions that increase the risk. There may be a number of factors 
which may suggest such moral hazard. 

Example 

When a proposal is submitted at a branch located far away from the place of 
residence of the proposed insured 
A medical examination is done elsewhere even when a qualified medical 
examiner is available near one‟s place of residence.
278 
A third case is when a proposal is made on the life of another without having 
clear insurable interest, or when the nominee is not the near dependent of 
the life proposed. 

In each such case an enquiry may be made. Finally, when the agent is 
related to the life assured a moral hazard report may be called from a 
branch official like the agency manager / development officer. 

f) Occupation 

Occupational hazards can emanate from any of three sources: 

 Accident 
 Health hazard 
 Moral hazard 

Diagram 5: Sources of Occupational Hazards 

i. 
Accidental hazards arise because certain kinds of jobs expose one to 
the risk of accident. There is any number of jobs in this category – 
like circus artistes, scaffolding workers, demolition experts and film 
stunt artistes. 

ii. Health hazards arise when the nature of the job is such as to give 
rise to possibility of medical impairment. There are various kinds of 
health hazards. 

 Some jobs like that of rickshaw pullers involve tremendous 
physical strain and impact the respiratory system. 
 The second situation is where one may be exposed to toxic 
substances like mining dust or carcinogenic substances (that 
cause cancer) like chemicals and nuclear radiation. 
 A third kind of hazard is posed by high pressure environments 
like underground tunnels or deep sea, which can cause acute 
decompression sickness. 
 Finally, overexposure to certain job situations (like sitting 
cramped and glued to a computer in a KPO or working in a high 
noise setting) can impair functioning of certain body parts in the 
longer run.
279 
iii. Moral hazard can arise when a job involves proximity or can cause 
predisposition towards criminal elements or to drugs and alcohol. An 
example is that of a dancer in a nightclub or an enforcer in a liquor 
bar or the „bodyguard‟ of a businessman with suspected criminal 
links. Again the job profiles of certain individuals like superstar 
entertainers may lead them to heady intoxicating lifestyles, which 
sometimes come to tragic ends. 
Wherever the occupation falls in one of the categories of jobs listed 
hazardous, the applicant for insurance would normally be required to 
complete an occupational questionnaire which would ask for specific details 
of the job, duties involved and risks exposed to. A rating may also be 
imposed for occupation in the form of a flat extra (for example Rupees two 
per thousand sums assured.) Such extra may be reduced or removed when 
the insured‟s occupation changes. 

g) Lifestyle and habits 

Lifestyle and habits are terms, which cover a wide range of individual 
characteristics. Generally the agents‟ confidential reports and moral hazard 
reports are expected to mention if any of these characteristics are present 
in the individual‟s lifestyles, which suggest exposure to risk. In particular 
three features are important: 

i. 
Smoking and tobacco use: It has now been well recognised that use of 
tobacco is not only a risk in itself but also contributes to increasing other 
medical risks. Companies charge differential rates today for smokers and 
non-smokers with the former having to pay much higher premiums. 
Other forms of tobacco usage like gutkha and paan masala may also 
attract adverse mortality ratings. 

ii. Alcohol: Drinking alcohol in modest quantities and occasionally is not a 
hazard. It is even an accepted part of social life in many countries. 
However when it is regularly consumed in excess for a long time it can 
have a significant impact on mortality risk. Long term heavy drinking can 
impair liver functioning and affect the digestive system. It can also lead 
to mental disorders. 

Alcoholism is also linked with accidents, violence and family abuse, 
depression and suicides. Where the proposal form indicates use of 
alcohol, the underwriter may call for further details and decide on the 
case depending on the extent of usage and any complications that are 
indicated to have been caused as a result. 

iii. Substance abuse: Substance abuse refers to the use of various kinds of 
substances like drugs or narcotics, sedatives and other similar 
stimulants. Some of these are even illegal and their use indicates 
criminal disposition and moral hazard. Where substance abuse is 
suspected, the underwriter may need to call for a number of tests to 
check the abuse. Insurance is often declined in such cases.
280 
Test Yourself 2 

Which of the following is an example of moral hazard? 

I. Stunt artist dies while performing a stunt 
II. A person drinking copious amounts of alcohol because he is inured 
III. Insured defaulting on premium payments 
IV. Proposer lying on policy document
281 

C. Medical underwriting 

1. Medical underwriting 

Let us now consider some of the medical factors that would influence an 
underwriter‟s decision. These are generally assessed through medical 
underwriting. They may often call for a medical examiner‟s report. Let us look 
at some of the factors that are checked. 

Diagram 6: Medical Factors that influence an Underwriter‘s Decision 

a) Family history 

The impact of family history on mortality risk has been studied from three 
angles. 

i. 
Heredity: Certain diseases can be transmitted from one generation to 
another, say from parents to children. 
ii. Average longevity of the family: When the parents have died early on 
account of certain diseases like heart trouble or cancer, it may be a 
pointer that the offspring may also not live long. 
iii. Family environment: Thirdly, the environment in which the family lives 
can cause exposure to infection and other risks. 

Life insurers have thus to be careful when entertaining cases of individuals 
with adverse family history. They may call for other reports and may impose 
an extra mortality rating in such cases. 

b) Personal history 

Personal history refers to past impairments of various systems of the human 
body which the life to be insured has suffered from. The proposal form for 
life insurance typically contains a set of questions which enquire whether 
the life to be insured has been under treatment for any of these.
282 

Such problems may also be indicated by the medical examiner‟s reports or 
any special reports called for. The major kinds of ailments that are killer 
diseases include 

i. Cardiovascular diseases which affect the heart and blood system – like 
heart attack, stroke and haemorrhage 

ii. Diseases of the respiratory system like Tuberculosis 

iii. Excessive production and reproduction of cells which leads to 
malignant tumours, also known as cancer 

iv. Ailments of the renal system, which includes the kidney and other 
urinary parts, which can lead to kidney failure and death 

v. Impairments of the endocrine system, the most well-known of which is 
Diabetes. It arises from the body‟s inability to generate sufficient insulin 
to metabolise the sugar (or glucose) in the blood stream. 

vi. Diseases of the digestive system like gastric ulcers and cirrhosis of the 
liver 

vii. Diseases of the nervous system 

c) Personal characteristics 

These can also be significant indicators of the tendency to disease. 

i. 
Build 

For instance a person‟s build consists of his height, weight, chest and girth 
of the abdomen. For given age and height, there is a standard weight that 
has been defined and if the weight is too high or low in relation to this 
standard weight, we can say that the person is overweight or underweight. 

Similarly, it is expected that the chest should be expanded at least by four 
centimetres in a normal person and that the abdominal girth should not be 
more than one‟s expanded chest. 

ii. Blood pressure 

Another indicator is a person‟s blood pressure. There are two measures of 
this 

 Systolic 
 Diastolic 
A thumb rule for arriving at normal blood pressure readings given age is 
For Systolic: It is 115 + 2/5 of age. 
For Diastolic: It is 75 + 1/5 of age
283 
Thus if age is 40 years, the normal blood pressure should be Systolic 131: 
and Diastolic 83. 

When the actual readings are much higher than the above values, we say 
that the person has high blood pressure or hypertension. When it is too low, 
it is termed as hypotension. The former can have serious consequences. 

The pressure of blood flowing in the system can also be indicated by the 
pulse rate. Pulse rates can vary from 50 to 90 beats per minute with an 
average of 72. 

iii. Urine – Specific gravity 

Finally, a reading of the specific gravity of one‟s urine can indicate the 
balance among various salts in the urinary system. It can indicate any 
malfunctioning of the system. 

Test Yourself 3 

Why is heredity history of importance in medical underwriting? 

I. Rich parents have healthy kids 
II. Certain diseases can be passed on from parents to children 
III. Poor parents have malnourished kids 
IV. Family environment is a critical factor
284 
Summary 

 
To usher equity, the underwriter engages in risk classification where 
individual lives are categorised and assigned to different risk classes 
depending on the degree of risks they pose. 

 
Underwriting or the selection process may be said to take place at two 
levels: 

 At field level and 
 At underwriting department level 

 
Judgment method or numerical method of underwriting is widely used for 
underwriting insurance proposals. 

 
Underwriting decisions made by underwriters include acceptance of 
standard risk at standard rates or charging extra for sub-standard risks. 
Sometimes there is acceptance with lien on sum assured or acceptance is 
based on restrictive clauses. Where the risk is large the proposal is declined 
or postponed. 

 
A large number of life insurance proposals may typically get selected for 
insurance without conducting a medical examination to check the 
insurability of an insurant. Such cases are termed as non-medical proposals. 

 
Some of the rating factors for non-medical underwriting include 

 Age 
 Large sum assured 
 Moral hazard etc. 

 
Some of the factors considered in medical underwriting include 

 Family history, 
 Heredity and personal history etc. 

Key Terms 

1. Underwriting 
2. Standard life 
3. Non-medical underwriting 
4. Rating factor 
5. Medical underwriting 
6. Anti-selection
285 
Answers to Test Yourself 

Answer 1 

The correct option is III. 

A person suffering from AIDS is most likely to be declined life insurance cover. 

Answer 2 

The correct option is II. 

A person drinking copious amounts of alcohol because he is inured is an example 
of moral hazard. 

Answer 3 

The correct option is II. 

Certain diseases can be passed on from parents to children and hence heredity 
history needs to be considered in medical underwriting. 

Self-Examination Questions 

Question 1 

Which of the following denotes the underwriter‟s role in an insurance company? 

I. Process claims 
II. Decide acceptability of risks 
III. Product design architect 
IV. Customer relations manager 

Question 2 

Which of the following is not an underwriting decision? 

I. Risk acceptance at standard rates 
II. Declinature of risk 
III. Postponement of risk 
IV. Claim rejection 

Question 3 

Which of the following is not a standard age proof? 

I. Passport 
II. School leaving certificate 
III. Horoscope 
IV. Birth certificate
286 
Question 4 

Which of the following condition will affect a person‟s insurability negatively? 

I. Daily jogs 
II. Banned substance abuse 
III. Lazy nature 
IV. Procrastination 

Question 5 

Under what method of underwriting does an underwriter assign positive rating 
points for all negative or adverse factors (negative points for any positive or 
favourable factors)? 

I. Judgment 
II. Arbitrary 
III. Numerical rating 
IV. Single step 

Question 6 

Under risk classification, ___________ consist of those whose anticipated 
mortality corresponds to the standard lives represented by the mortality table. 

I. Standard lives 
II. Preferred risks 
III. Sub-standard lives 
IV. Declined lives 

Question 7 

Amruta is pregnant. She has applied for a term insurance cover. Which of the 
below option will be the best option to choose for an underwriter to offer 
insurance to Amruta? Choose the most likely option. 

I. Acceptance at ordinary rates 
II. Acceptance with extra premium 
III. Decline the proposal 
IV. Acceptance with a restrictive clause 

Question 8 

Which of the below insurance proposal is not likely to qualify under non-medical 
underwriting? 

I. Savita, aged 26 years, working in an IT company as a software engineer 
II. Mahesh, aged 50 years, working in a coal mine 
III. Satish, aged 28 years, working in a bank and has applied for an insurance 
cover of Rs. 1 crore 
IV. Pravin, aged 30 years, working in a departmental store and has applied for 
an endowment insurance plan for a tenure of 10 years 

Question 9
287 
Sheena is suffering from acute diabetes. She has applied for an insurance plan. 
In this case the underwriter is most likely to use ____________ for underwriting. 
Choose the most appropriate option. 

I. Judgment method 
II. Numerical method 
III. Any of the above method since an illness like diabetes does not play a major 
role in the underwriting process 
IV. Neither of the above method as diabetes cases are rejected outright 

Question 10 

Santosh has applied for a term insurance policy. His anticipated mortality is 
significantly lower than standard lives and hence could be charged a lower 
premium. Under risk classification, Santosh will be classified under 
___________. 

I. Standard lives 
II. Preferred risks 
III. Substandard lives 
IV. Declined lives 

Answers to Self-Examination Questions 

Answer 1 

The correct option is II. 

Underwriter decides acceptability of risks. 

Answer 2 

The correct option is IV. 

Claim rejection is not an underwriting decision. 

Answer 3 

The correct option is III. 

Horoscope is not a standard age proof. 

Answer 4 

The correct option is II. 

Banned substance abuse will affect a person‟s insurability negatively. 

Answer 5 

The correct option is III.
288 
Numerical rating method of underwriting assigns positive rating points for all 
negative or adverse factors (negative points for any positive or favourable 
factors). 

Answer 6 

The correct option is I. 

Under risk classification, standard lives consist of those whose anticipated 
mortality corresponds to the standard lives represented by the mortality table. 

Answer 7 

The correct option is IV. 

In Amruta‟s case, considering her pregnancy, the best option that the 
underwriter can choose is to offer insurance to Amruta with a restrictive clause. 
This restrictive clause can be limiting insurance payment in the event of 
pregnancy related death occurring within say three months of delivery. 

Answer 8 

The correct option is II. 

Mahesh‟s insurance proposal is not likely to qualify under non-medical 
underwriting because his age is higher (50 years) and his occupation is more 
risky as compared to other occupations in software, banking industry etc. 

Answer 9 

The correct option is I. 

When deciding on a complex case like that of Sheena who is suffering from 
acute diabetes, the underwriter will use the judgment method of underwriting. 

Answer 10 

The correct option is II. 

Under risk classification, Santosh will be classified under preferred risks.
289 
CHAPTER 16 

PAYMENTS UNDER A LIFE INSURANCE POLICY 
Chapter Introduction 

This chapter explains the concept of claim and how claims are ascertained. The 
chapter then explains the types of claims. In the end you will learn about the 
forms to be submitted for a death claim and the safeguards (indisputability 
clause and Protection of Policyholders Interests Regulations) in place to protect 
beneficiary from claim rejection by the insurer, provided no material 
information has been suppressed by the insured. 

Learning Outcomes 

A. Types of claims and claims procedure
290 
A. Types of claims and claims procedure 

1. Concept of claims 

The real test of an insurance company and an insurance policy comes when a 
policy results into a claim. The true value of life insurance is judged by the way 
a claim is settled and benefits are paid. 

Definition 

A claim is a demand that the insurer should make good the promise specified in 
the contract. 

A claim under a life insurance contract is triggered by the happening of one or 
more of the events covered under the insurance contract. While in some claims, 
the contract continues, in others, the contract is terminated. 

Diagram 1: Risk event and claim 

Claims can be of two types: 

i. 
survival claims payable even when the life assured is alive and 
ii. death claim 

Diagram 2: Types of claims 

While a death claim arises only upon the death of the life assured, survival 
claims can be caused by one or more events.
291 
Example 

Examples of events triggering survival claims are: 

i. Maturity of the policy; 
ii. An instalment payable upon reaching the milestone under a money-back 
policy; 
iii. Critical illnesses covered under the policy as a rider benefit; 
iv. Surrender of the policy either by the policyholder or assignee; 

2. Ascertaining whether a claim event has occurred 

i. For payment of a survival claim, the insurer has to ascertain that the 
event has occurred as per the conditions stipulated in the policy. 

ii. Maturity claims and money-back instalment claims are easily 
established as they are based on dates which are determined at the 
beginning of the contract itself. 

For instance, the date of maturity and the dates when the instalments of 
survival benefits may be paid under a money back policy are clearly laid 
out at the time of preparing the contract. 

iii. Surrender value payments are different from other claim payments. 
Unlike other claims, here the event is triggered by the decision of the 
policy holder or assignee to cancel the contract and withdraw what is 
due to him or her under the contract. Surrender payments would 
typically involve a penalty for premature withdrawal and hence would be 
less than what would have been due if the full claim were to be paid. 

iv. Critical illness claims are ascertained based on the medical and other 
records provided by the policyholder in support of his claim. 

The complexity arises in case of a policy that has a critical illness claim 
rider and such policy has been assigned. The purpose of a critical illness 
benefit is to enable a policy holder to defray his expenses in the event of 
such an illness. If this policy where to be assigned, all benefits would be 
payable to the assignee. Although this is legally correct, it may not meet 
the intended purpose. In order to avoid such a situation, it is important 
to educate policyholders about the extent of benefits that they may 
assign, by way of a conditional assignment.