Registration of a claim is the process of entering the claim in the system and 
creating a reference number using which the claim can be traced any time. 
This number is called Claim number, Claim reference number or Claim 
control number. The claim number could be numeric or alpha-numeric based 
on the system and processes used by the processing organization 

Registration and generation of a reference no. is usually done once the 
claim intimation is received and the correct policy number and insured 
person‟s particulars are matched. 

Once a claim is registered in the system, a reserve for the same would be 
created simultaneously in the accounts of the insurer. At the time of 
intimation/registration, the exact claim amount or estimate may not be 
known. The initial reserve amount is therefore a standard reserve (mostly 
based on historical average claim size). Once the estimate or expected 
amount of liability is known, the reserve is revised upward/downward to 
reflect the same. 

c) Verification of documents 

Once a claim is registered, the next step is to check for the receipt of all 
the required documents for processing. 

It must be appreciated that for a claim to be processed following are the 
most important requirements:
443 

1. The documentary evidence of the illness 
2. Treatment provided 
3. In-patient duration 
4. Investigation Reports 
5. Payment made to the hospital 
6. Further advice for treatment 
7. Payment proofs for implants etc. 

Verification of documents follows a checklist which the claim processor 
checks out. Most of the companies ensure that such checklists are part of 
the processing documentation. 

The missing documentation is noted at this stage – while some processes 
involve requesting for the documents not submitted by the customer / 
hospital at this point, most of the companies first complete the scrutiny of 
all the documents submitted before requesting for additional information so 
that the customer is not inconvenienced. 

d) Capturing the billing information 

Billing is an important part of the claim processing cycle. Typical health 
insurance policies provide for indemnifying expenses incurred in the 
treatment with specific limits under various heads. The standard practice is 
to classify the treatment charges into: 

 Room, board and nursing expenses including registration and service 
charges. 
 Charges for ICU and any intensive care operations. 
 Operation theatre charges, anaesthesia, blood, oxygen, operation 
theatre charges, surgical appliances, medicines and drugs, diagnostic 
materials and X-ray, dialysis, chemotherapy, radiotherapy, cost of 
pacemaker, artificial limbs and any medical expenses incurred which is 
integral part of the operation. 
 Surgeon, anaesthetist, medical practitioner, consultant's, specialists 
fees. 
 Ambulance charges. 
 Investigation charges covering blood test, X-ray, scans, etc. 
 Medicines and drugs. 

Documents submitted by the customer are examined to capture information 
under these heads so that the settlement of claims can be done with 
accuracy. 

Though there are efforts being made to standardize the billing pattern of 
hospitals, it is common for each hospital to use a different method for 
billing and the challenges faced in this are: 

 Room charges can include some non-payables such as service charges 
or diet.
444 
 Single bill can include different headings or a lump-sum bill for all 
investigations or all medicines. 
 Non-standard names being used – e.g. nursing charges being called 
service charges. 
 Use of words like “similar charges”, “etc.”, “allied expenses” in the 
bill. 

Where the billing is not clear, the processor seeks the break up or additional 
information, so that the doubts on the classification and admissibility are 
resolved. 

To address this issue, IRDAI issued Health Insurance Standardization 
Guidelines which have standardized the format of such bills and the list of 
non-payable items. 

Package rates 

Many hospitals have agreed package rates for treatment of certain diseases. 
This is based on the ability of the hospital to standardize the treatment 
procedure and use of resources. In recent times, for treatment at Preferred 
Provider Network and also in case of RSBY, package cost of many procedures 
has been pre-fixed. 

Example 

a) Cardiac packages: Angiogram, Angioplasty, CABG or Open heart surgery, etc. 

b) Gynaecological 
packages: 
Normal 
delivery, 
Caesarean 
delivery, 
hysterectomy, etc. 

c) Orthopaedic packages 

d) Ophthalmological packages 

Additional costs due to complications after surgery are charged separately 
on actual basis if incurred over and above these. 

Packages have the advantages of certainty of the cost involved and 
standardization of the procedures and so such claims are easier to handle. 

e) Coding of claims 

The most important code set used is the World Health Organization (WHO) 
developed International Classification of Diseases (ICD) codes. 

While ICD is used to capture the disease in a standardized format, procedure 
codes such as Current Procedure Terminology (CPT) codes capture the 
procedures performed to treat the illness.
445 
Insurers are relying on the coding increasingly and Insurance Information 
Bureau (IIB), which is part of Insurance Regulatory and Development 
Authority (IRDAI), has started an information bank where such information 
that can be analyzed. 

f) Processing of claim 

A reading of the health insurance policy shows that while it is a commercial 
contract, it involves medical terms that define when a claim is payable and 
to what extent. The heart of claims processing in any insurance policy, is in 
answering two key questions: 

 Is the claim payable under the policy? 
 If yes, what is the net payable amount? 

Each of these questions requires understanding of a number of terms and 
conditions of the policy issued as well as the rates agreed with the hospital 
in case treatment has taken place at a network hospital. 

Admissibility of a claim 

For a health claim to be admissible the following conditions must be 
satisfied. 

i. The member hospitalized must be covered under the insurance policy 

While this looks simple, we come across situations where the names (and in 
more cases, the age) of the person covered and person hospitalized do not 
match. This could be because of: 

It is important to ensure that the person covered under the policy and the 
person hospitalized is the same. This kind of fraud is very common in health 
insurance. 

ii. Admission of the patient within the period of insurance 

iii. Hospital definition 

The hospital where the person was admitted should be as per the definition 
of “hospital or nursing home” under the policy otherwise the claim is not 
payable. 

iv. Domiciliary hospitalization 

Some policies cover domiciliary hospitalization i.e. treatment taken at home 
in India for a period exceeding 3 days for an ailment which normally requires 
treatment at hospital/nursing home.
446 

Domiciliary hospitalization, if covered in a policy, is payable only if: 

 The condition of the patient is such that he/she cannot be removed 
to the Hospital/Nursing Home or 

 The patient cannot be removed to Hospital/Nursing Home for lack of 
accommodation therein 

v. Duration of hospitalization 

Health insurance policies normally cover hospitalization exceeding 24 hours 
as an in-patient. Therefore the date and time of admission as well as 
discharge becomes important to note if this condition is satisfied. 

Day-care treatments 

Technological developments in the healthcare industry have led to 
simplification of many procedures that earlier required complex and 
prolonged hospitalization. There are a number of procedures carried out on 
day care basis without need for hospitalization exceeding 24 hours. 

Most of the day care procedures are on pre-agreed package rate basis, 
resulting in certainty in costs. 

vi. OPD 

Some policies cover treatment/consultations taken as an out-patient also, 
subject to a specific sum insured which is usually less than the 
hospitalization sum insured. 

The coverage under OPD varies from policy to policy. For such 
reimbursements, the clause for 24 hours hospitalization is not applicable. 

vii. Treatment procedure/line of treatment 

Hospitalization is typically associated with Allopathic method of treatment. 
However, the patient could undergo other modes of treatment such as: 

 Unani 
 Siddha 
 Homeopathy 
 Ayurveda 
 Naturopathy etc. 

Most policies exclude these treatments while some policies cover one or 
more of these treatments with sub-limits.
447 
viii. Pre-existing illnesses 

Definition 

Pre-existing illnesses refer to “Any condition, ailment or injury or related 
condition(s) for which insured person had signs or symptoms and/or was 
diagnosed and/or received medical advice/treatment within 48 months prior to 
his/her health policy with the company whether explicitly known to him or 
not.” 

The reason for excluding pre-existing illnesses is due to the fundamental 
principles of insurance that a certainty cannot be covered under insurance. 

However, application of this principle is quite difficult and involves a 
systematic check of the symptoms and treatment to find out whether the 
person had the condition at the time of insuring. As medical professionals 
can differ in the opinions of duration of the illness, the opinion of when the 
disease first showed up is carefully taken before applying this condition to 
deny any claim. 

In the evolution of health insurance, we come across two modifications to 
this exclusion. 

 The first is in the case of group insurance where the entire group of 
people is insured, with no selection against the insurer. Group policies 
covering, say all government employees, all families below poverty line, 
all families of employees of a major corporate group, etc. are treated 
favorably as compared to a single family opting to cover for the first 
time. These policies often deleted the exception, with exception 
adequate price built in. 

 The second modification is that pre-existing illnesses are covered after 
the a certain period of continuous coverage. This follows the principle 
that even a condition is present in a person, if it does not show up for a 
certain period of time, it cannot be treated as a certainty. 
ix. Initial waiting period 

A typical health insurance policy covers illnesses only after an initial 30 days 
(except accident related hospitalization). 

Similarly, there are lists of illnesses such as: 

 Cataract, 
 Benign Prostatic Hypertrophy, 
 Hysterectomy, 
 Fistula, 
 Piles, 
 Hernia, 
 Hydrocele, 
 Sinusitis, 
 Knee / Hip Joint replacement 
etc. 

These are not covered for an initial period that could be one year or two 
years or more depending on specific insurance company‟s product.
448 

The claim processor identifies if the illness is one of these and how long the 
person has been covered to check if it falls within this admissibility 
condition. 

x. Exclusions 

The policy lists out a set of exclusions which in general can be classified as: 

 Benefits such as maternity (though this is covered in some policies). 
 Outpatient and Dental treatments. 
 Illnesses which are not intended to be covered such as HIV, Hormone 
therapy, obesity treatment, fertility treatment, cosmetic surgeries, etc. 
 Diseases caused by alcohol/drug abuse. 
 Medical treatment outside India. 
 High hazard activities, suicide attempt, radioactive contamination. 
 Admission for tests/investigation purpose only. 

In such a case it is extremely important for the claims handler to specifically 
explain the circumstances so that the specialist opinion is exactly to the 
point and will stand the scrutiny in a court of law, if challenged. 

xi. Compliance with conditions with respect to the claims. 

The insurance policy also defines certain actions to be taken by the Insured 
in case of a claim, some of which are important for admissibility of the 
claim. 

In general, these relate to: 

 Intimation of claim within certain period – we have seen the 
importance of intimation earlier. The policy could stipulate a time 
within which such intimation must reach the company. 

 Submission of claim documents within a certain period. 

 Not being involved in misrepresentation, misdescription or non-
disclosure of material facts. 

g) Arriving at the final claim payable 

Once the claim is admissible, the next step is to decide the the amount of 
claim payable. To compute this we need to understand the factors that 
decide the claim amount payable. These factors are:
449 

i. Sum insured available for the member under the policy 

There are policies issued with individual sum insured, some issued on floater 
basis where the sum insured is available across the family or policies which 
are on floater basis but with a limit per member. 

ii. Balance sum insured available under the policy for the member after 
taking into account any claim made already: 

While calculating the balance of sum insured available after deducting 
claims already paid, any later cashless authorization provided to the 
hospitals will also have to be noted. 

iii. Sub-Limits 

Most policies specify room rent limitation, nursing charges etc. either as a 
percentage of sum insured or as a limit per day. Similar limitation could be 
in force for consultant fee, or ambulance charges, etc. 

iv. Check for any limits specific to illness 

The policy could specify a certain amount or capping for maternity cover or 
for other diseases say, cardiac illness. 

v. Check whether entitled or not to cumulative bonus 

Verify whether the insured is entitled to any no-claim bonus (in case the 
insured has not claimed from his policy in the previous year/s). No-claim 
bonus often comes in the form of additional sum insured, which in fact 
increases the sum insured of the patient/insured. Sometimes, the 
cumulative bonus may also be wrongly stated as claims intimated towards 
the end of the previous year may not have been taken into account. 

vi. Other expenses covered with limitation: 

There could be other limits e.g. if treatment is undertaken under Ayurvedic 
system of medicine, usually the same has a much lower limit. Health check-
up costs are only up to a certain limit after four years of the policy. Hospital 
cash payment also has a per day limit. 

vii. Co-payment 

This is normally a flat percentage of the assessed claim before payment. The 
co-pay could also be applicable only in select circumstances – only for 
parent claims, only for maternity claims, only from second claim onwards or 
even only on claims exceeding a certain amount. 

Before the payable amount is adjusted to these limits, the claim amount 
payable is computed net of deductions for non-payable items.
450 
Non-payable items in a health claim 

The expenses incurred in treating an illness can be classified into: 

 Expenses for cure and 
 Expenses for care. 

Expenses for curing an illness comprise of all the medical costs and the 
normal related facilities. In addition, there could be costs incurred to make 
the stay in a hospital more comfortable or even luxurious. 

A typical health insurance policy attends to the expenses for curing an 
illness and unless stated specifically, the extra expenses for luxury are not 
payable. 

These expenses can be classified into non-treatment charges such as 
registration charge, documentation charges, etc. and to items that can be 
considered if directly relating to the cure (e.g. protein supplement during 
the inpatient period specifically prescribed). 

Earlier every TPA/insurer had its own list of non-payable items, now the 
same has been standardized under IRDAI Health Insurance Standardization 
Guidelines. 

The order of arriving at the final claim payable is as follows: 

Table 2.1 

Step I 
List all the bills and receipts under the various heads of room rent, 
consultant fee, etc. 
Step II 
Deduct the non-payable items from the amount claimed under each 
head 
Step III 
Apply any limits applicable for each head of expense 
Step IV 
Arrive at the total payable amount and check if it is within sum 
insured overall 
Step V 
Deduct any co-pay if applicable to arrive at the net claim payable 

h) Payment of claim 

Once the payable claim amount is arrived at, payment is done to the 
customer or the hospital as the case may be. The approved claim amount is 
advised to the Finance / Accounts function and the payment may be made 
either by cheque or by transferring the claim money to the customer‟s bank 
account.
451 
When the payment is made to the hospital, necessary tax deduction, if any 
is made from the payment. 

Where the payment is handled by the Third Party Administrator, the 
payment process may vary from insurer to insurer. A more detailed insight 
into working of TPAs is provided later on. 

Payment updates in the system are crucial for handling customer inquiries. 
Typically these details will be shared through the system with the call 
centre / customer service team. 

Once payment is made, the claim is treated as settled. Reports have to be 
periodically sent to the company‟s management, intermediaries, customers 
and IRDAI for number and amount of settled claims. The typical analysis of 
settled claims includes the % settled, amount of non-payables as a 
proportion, average time taken to settle claims, etc. 

i) Management of deficiency of documents / additional information 
required 

Processing of a claim requires the scrutiny of a list of key documents. These 
are: 

 Discharge summary with admission notes, 
 Supporting investigation reports, 
 Final consolidated bill with break up into various parts, 
 Prescriptions and pharmacy bills, 
 Payment receipts, 
 Claim form and 
 Customer identification. 

Experience shows that one out of four claims submitted has a suffer from 
being incomplete in terms of the basic documents. It is therefore required 
that the customer is advised of the documents not submitted and is given a 
time limit within which he can attach them to his claim. 

Similarly, it may happen that while a claim is being processed, additional 
information may be required because: 

i. The discharge summary provided is not in the correct format as 
prescribed by IRDAI or does not capture some details of the diagnosis or 
the history of the illness. 

ii. Treatment given has not been described in enough detail or requires 
clarification. 

iii. The treatment is not in line with the diagnosis as per discharge summary 
or medicines prescribed are not related to the illness for which 
treatment was provided.
452 

iv. The bills provided do not have the required break up. 

v. Mismatch of age of the person between two of the documents. 

vi. Mismatch in date of admission / date of discharge between discharge 
summary and the bill. 

vii. The claim requires a more detailed scrutiny of the hospitalization and 
for this, the hospital‟s indoor case papers are required. 

In both the cases, the customer is informed in writing or through email 
detailing the requirement of additional information. In most cases, the 
customer will be able to provide the information required. However, there 
are circumstances where the information required is too important to be 
overlooked but the customer does not respond. In such cases, the customer 
is sent reminders that the information is needed to process the claim and 
after three such reminders, a claim closure notice is sent. 

In all correspondence relating to a claim when it is in process, you will see 
that the words “Without Prejudice” are mentioned on top of the letter. This 
is a legal requirement to ensure that the right of the insurer to reject a 
claim after these correspondences remains intact. 

Example 

The insurer may ask for indoor case papers to study the case in detail and may 
come to a conclusion that the procedure / treatment does not fall within the 
policy conditions. The act of asking for more information should not be treated 
as an act that implies that the insurer has accepted the claim. 

Managing shortfalls in documentation and explanation and additional 
information required is a key challenge in claims management. While the 
claim cannot be processed without all the required information, the 
customer cannot be put to inconvenience by frequent requests for more and 
more information. 

Good practice requires that such request is raised once with a consolidated 
list of all information that may be needed and no new requirement is raised 
thereafter. 

j) Denial claims 

The experience in health claims show that 10% to 15% of the claims 
submitted do not fall within the terms of the policy. This could be because 
of a variety of reasons some of which are:
453 
i. 
Date of admission is not within the period of insurance. 
ii. The Member for whom the claim is made is not covered. 
iii. Due to Pre-existing illness (where the policy excludes such condition). 
iv. Undue delay in submission without valid reason. 
v. No active treatment; admission is only for investigation purpose. 
vi. Illness treated is excluded under the policy. 
vii. The cause of illness is abuse of alcohol or drugs 
viii. Hospitalization is less than 24 hours. 

Denial or repudiation of a claim (due to whatever reason) has to be 
informed to the customer in writing. Usually, such denial letter clearly 
states the reason for denial, narrating the policy term / condition on which 
the claim was denied. 

Most insurers have a process by which a denial is authorized by a manager 
senior to the one authorized to approve the claim. This is to ensure that any 
denial is fully justified and will be explained in case the insured seeks any 
legal remedy. 

Apart from the representation to the insurer, the customer has the option, 
to approach the following in case of denial of claim: 

 Insurance Ombudsman or 
 The consumer forums or 
 IRDAI or 
 Law courts. 

In case of each denial the file is checked to assess if the denial will stand 
the legal scrutiny in the normal course and the documents are stored in a 
safe location, should a need to defend the decision arise. 

k) Suspect claims for more detailed investigation 

Insurers have been trying to handle the problem of fraud in all lines of 
business. In terms of sheer number of fraud claims handled, health 
insurance presents a great challenge to the insurers. 

Few examples of frauds committed in health insurance are: 

i. Impersonation, the person insured is different from person treated. 

ii. Fabrication of documents to make a claim where there is no 
hospitalization. 

iii. Inflation of expenses, either with the help of the hospital or by addition 
of external bills fraudulently created.
454 
iv. Outpatient treatment converted to in-patient / hospitalization to 
cover cost of diagnosis, which could be high in some conditions. 

With newer methods of frauds emerging on a daily basis, the insurers and 
TPAs have to continuously monitor the situation on the ground and come up 
with measures to find and control such frauds. 

Claims are chosen for investigation based on two methods: 

 Routine claims and 
 Triggered claims 

A TPA or an insurer may set an internal standard that a specific percentage 
of the claims be physically verified; this percentage could be different for 
cashless and reimbursement claims. 

Under this method, claims are chosen using random sampling method. Some 
insurers stipulate that all claims above a certain value be investigated and a 
sampled set of claims which are below that limit are taken up for 
verification. 

In the second method, each claim goes through a set of checkpoints which if 
not in line, trigger investigation such as 
i. a high portion of the claim relating to medical tests or medicines 
ii. customer too eager to settle 
iii. bills with over-writing, etc. 

If the claim is suspected to be not genuine, the claim is investigated, 
however small it is. 

n. Cashless settlement process by TPA 

How does the cashless facility work? At the heart of this is an agreement 
that the TPA insurer enters into, with the hospital. There are agreements 
possible with other medical service providers as well. We shall look at the 
process used for providing cashless facility in this section: 

Table 3.1 

Step 1 
A customer covered under health insurance suffers from an illness or 
sustains an injury and so is advised admission into a hospital. He/she 
(or someone on his/her behalf) approaches the hospital‟s insurance 
desk with the insurance details such as: 

i. TPA name, 
ii. His membership number, 
iii. Insurer name, etc.
455 
Step 2 
The hospital compiles the necessary information such as: 

i. Illness diagnosis 
ii. Treatment, 
iii. Name of treating doctor, 
iv. Number of days of proposed hospitalization and 
v. The estimated cost 

This is presented in a format, called the cashless authorization 
form. 
Step 3 
The TPA studies the information provided in the cashless 
authorization form. It checks the information with the policy terms 
and the agreed tariff with the hospital, if any, and arrives at the 
decision on whether the cashless authorization could be provided and 
if so, for how much amount it should be authorized. 

The TPA could ask for more information to arrive at the decision. 
Once the decision is made, it is communicated to the hospital without 
delay. 

Both forms have now been standardized under IRDAI Health Insurance 
Standardization Guidelines; refer to Annexure at the end). 
Step 4 
The patient is treated by the hospital, keeping the amount authorized 
by the TPA as credit in the patient‟s account. The member may be 
called on to make a deposit payment to cover the non-treatment 
expenses and any co-pay required under the policy. 
Step 5 
When the patient is ready for discharge, the hospital checks the 
amount of credit in the account of the patient approved by the TPA 
against the actual treatment charges covered by insurance. 

If the credit is less, the hospital requests for additional approval of 
credit for the cashless treatment. 

TPA analyses the same and approves the additional amount. 
Step 6 
Patient pays the non-admissible charges and gets discharged. He will 
be asked to sign the claim form and the bill, to complete the 
documentation.
456 
Step 7 
Hospital consolidates all the documents and presents to the TPA the 
following documents for processing of the bill: 

i. 
Claim form 
ii. 
Discharge summary / admission notes 
iii. Patient / proposer identification card issued by the TPA and 
photo ID proof. 
iv. Final consolidated bill 
v. 
Detailed bill 
vi. Investigation reports 
vii. Prescription and pharmacy bills 
viii. Approval letters sent by the TPA 
Step 8 
TPA will process the claim and recommend for payment to the 
hospital after verifying details such as the following: 

i. The Patient treated is the same person for whom approval was 
provided. 
ii. Treated the patient for the same condition that it requested the 
approval for. 
iii. Expenses for treatment of excluded illness, if any, is not part of 
the bill. 
iv. All limits that were communicated to the hospital have been 
adhered to. 
v. Tariff rates agreed with the hospital have been adhered to, 
calculate the net payable amount. 

The value of cashless facility is not in doubt. It is also important for the 
customer to know how to make the best use of the facility. The points to note 
are: 

i. Customer must make sure that he/she has his/her insurance details with 
him/her. This includes his: 

 TPA card, 
 Policy copy, 
 Terms and conditions of cover etc. 

When this is not available, he can contact the TPA (through a 24 hour 
helpline) and seek the details. 

ii. Customer must check if the hospital suggested by his/her consulting 
doctor is in the network of the TPA. If not, he needs to check with the 
TPA the options available where cashless facility for such treatment is 
available. 

iii. He/she needs to make sure that the correct details are entered into the 
pre-authorization form. This form has been standardized by IRDAI as per
457 
Guidelines on Standardization in Health Insurance issued in 2013. If the 
case is not clear, the TPA could deny the cashless facility or raise query. 

iv. He/she needs to ensure that the hospital charges are consistent with the 
limits such as room rent or caps on specified treatments such as 
cataract. 

In case he/she wants to spend more than what is allowed by the policy, it is 
better to know, in advance, what would be his/her share of expenses. 

v. The customer must inform the TPA in advance of the discharge and 
request the hospital to send to the TPA any additional approval that may 
be required before discharge. This will ensure the patient does not wait 
unnecessarily at the hospital. 

It is also possible that the customer requests and takes an approval for 
cashless treatment at a hospital but decides to admit the patient elsewhere. 
In such cases, the customer must inform and ask the hospital to 
communicate to the TPA that the cashless approval is not being used. 

If this is not done, the amount approved could get blocked in the customer‟s 
policy and could prejudice the approval of the subsequent request.
458 
C. Documentation in health insurance claims 

Health insurance claims require a range of documents for processing, as 
explained earlier. Each document is expected to assist in answering the two key 
questions – admissibility (Is it payable?) and extent of claim (how much?). 

This section explains the need for and content of each of the documents 
required to be submitted by the customers: 

1. Discharge summary 

Discharge summary can be termed as the most important document that is 
required to process a health insurance claim. It details the complete 
information about the condition of the patient and the line of treatment. 

As per IRDAI Standardization Guidelines the contents of a standard Discharge 
Summary are as follows: 

1. Patient‟s Name 
2. Telephone No / Mobile No 
3. IPD No 
4. Admission No 
5. Treating Consultant/s Name, contact numbers and Department / 
Specialty 
6. Date of Admission with Time 
7. Date of Discharge with Time 
8. MLC No / FIR No 
9. Provisional Diagnosis at the time of Admission 
10. Final Diagnosis at the time of Discharge 
11. ICD-10 code(s) or any other codes, as recommended by the 
Authority, for Final diagnosis 
12. Presenting Complaints with Duration and Reason for Admission 
13. Summary of Presenting Illness 
14. Key findings on physical examination at the time of admission 
15. History of alcoholism, tobacco or substance abuse, if any 
16. Significant Past Medical and Surgical History, if any 
17. Family History if significant/relevant to diagnosis or treatment 
18. Summary of key investigations during Hospitalization 
19. Course in the Hospital including complications if any 
20. Advice on Discharge 
21. Name & Signature of treating Consultant/ Authorized Team 
Doctor 
22. Name & Signature of Patient / Attendant 

A well written discharge summary helps the claim processing person immensely 
to understand the illness / injury and the line of treatment, thereby speeding 
up the process of settlement. Where the patient unfortunately does not survive, 
the discharge summary is termed Death Summary in many hospitals.
459 
The discharge summary is always sought in original. 
2. Investigation reports 

Investigation reports assist in comparing the diagnosis and the treatment, 
thereby providing the necessary information to understand the exact condition 
that prompted the treatment and the progress made during the hospitalization. 

Investigation reports usually consist of: 

a) Blood test reports; 

b) X-ray reports; 

c) Scan reports and 

d) Biopsy reports 

All investigation reports carry the name, age, gender, date of test etc. and 
typically presented in original. The insurer may return the X-ray and other films 
to the customer on specific request. 

3. Consolidated and detailed bills: 

This is the document that decides what needs to be paid under the insurance 
policy. Earlier there was no standard format for the bill, but IRDAI 
Standardization Guidelines provide format for consolidated and detailed bills. 
The student is advised to understand the details available on the IRDAI website. 

While the consolidated bill presents the overall picture, the detailed bill will 
provide the break up, with reference codes. 

Scrutiny of non-payable expenses is done using the detailed bill, where the non-
admissible expenses are rounded off and used for deduction under the expense 
head to which it belongs. 

The bills have to be received in original. 

4. Receipt for payment 

Being a contract of indemnity, the reimbursement of a health insurance claim 
will also require the formal receipt from the hospital of the amount paid. 

While the amount paid must correspond to the total of the bill, many hospitals 
do provide an element of concession or discount in the payable amount. In such 
a case, the insurer is called to pay only the amount actually paid on behalf of 
the patient. 

The receipt should be numbered and or stamped and be presented in original.
460 
5. Claim form 

Claim form is the formal and legal request for processing the claim and is 
submitted in original signed by the customer. The claim form has now been 
standardized by IRDAI and broadly consists of: 

a) Details of the primary insured and the policy number under which the 
claim is made. 
b) Details of the insurance history 

c) Details of the insured person hospitalized. 

d) Details of the hospitalization such as hospital, room category, date and 
time of admission and discharge, whether reported to police in case of 
accident, system of medicine etc. 

e) Details of the claim for which the hospitalization was done including 
breakdown of the costs, pre and post-hospitalization period, details of 
lump-sum/cash benefit claimed etc. 

f) Details of bills enclosed 

g) Details of bank account of primary insured for remittance of sanctioned 
claim 

h) Declaration from the insured. 

Besides information on disease, treatment etc., the declaration from the 
insured person makes the claim form the most important document in the legal 
sense. 

It is this declaration which applies the “doctrine of utmost good faith” into the 
claim, breach of which attracts the misrepresentation clause under the policy. 

6. Identity proof 

With the increasing use of identity proof across various activities in our life, the 
general proof of identity serves an important purpose – that of verifying 
whether the person covered and the person treated are one and the same. 

Usually identification document which is sought could be: 

a) Voters identity card, 

b) Driving license, 

c) PAN card, 

d) Aadhaar card etc.
461 
Insistence on identity proof has resulted in a significant reduction of 
impersonation cases in cashless claims as the identity proof is sought before 
hospitalization, making it a duty of the hospital to verify and present the same 
to the insurer or the TPA. 

In reimbursement claims, the identity proof serves a lesser purpose. 

7. Documents contingent to specific claims 

There are certain types of claims that require additional documents apart from 
what has been stated above. These are: 

a) Accident claims, where FIR or Medico-legal certificate issued by the 
hospital to the registered police station, may be required. It states the 
cause of accident and if the person was under the influence of alcohol, 
in case of traffic accidents. 

b) Case indoor papers in case of complicated or high value claims. Indoor 
case paper or case sheet is a document which is maintained at the 
hospital end, detailing all treatment given to patient on day to day basis 
for entire duration of hospitalization. 

c) Dialysis / Chemotherapy / Physiotherapy charts where applicable. 

d) Hospital registration certificate, where the compliance with the 
definition of hospital needs to be checked. 

The claims team uses certain internal document formats for processing a claim. 
These are: 

i. Checklists for document verification, 

ii. Scrutiny/ settlement sheet, 

iii. Quality checks / control format. 

Though these formats are not uniform across the insurers, let us study the 
purpose of the documents with a specimen of the usual contents.
462 
Table 2.2 

1. 
Document 
verification 
sheet 
It is the simplest of all, a check mark placed on the 
list of documents received to note that these have 
been submitted by the customer. Some insurers may 
provide a copy of this as an acknowledgement to the 
customer. 
2. Scrutiny/process 
sheet 
It is usually a single sheet where the entire processing 
notes are captured. 

a) Name of the customer and id number 
b) Claim number, date of receipt of the claim papers 
c) Policy overview, Section 64VB compliance 
d) Sum insured and utilization of sum insured 
e) Date of hospitalization and discharge 
f) Diagnosis and treatment 
g) Claim admissibility / processing comments with 
reason thereof 
h) Computation of claim amount 
i) Movement of the claim with dates and names of 
people who processed 
3. Quality checks / 
control format 
Final check or quality control format for checking of 
claim by person other than claim handler 

Besides check list and claim scrutiny questionnaire, 
the quality control/audit format shall also include 
information relating to: 

a) Settlement of claim, 
b) Rejection of claim or 
c) Requesting for additional information. 

Test Yourself 2 

Which of the following document is maintained at the hospital detailing all 
treatment done to an in-patient? 

I. Investigation report 
II. Settlement sheet 
III. Case paper 
IV. Hospital registration certificate
463 
D. Claims reserving 

1. Reserving 

This refers to the amount of provision made for all claims in the books of the 
insurer based on the status of the claims. While this looks very simple, the 
process of reserving requires enormous care – any mistake in reserving affects 
the insurer‟s profits and solvency margin calculation.