Variable life policies have become the preferred option for those who 
wanted to keep their assets invested in an assortment of funds of their 
choice and also wanted to directly benefit from favourable investment 
performance of their portfolio. A prime condition for their purchase is that 
the purchaser must be able and willing to bear the investment risk on the 
policy. This implies that variable life policies should be typically bought by 
people who are knowledgeable and quite comfortable with equity / debt 
investments and market volatility. Obviously, its popularity would depend on 
investment market conditions – thriving in market booms and declining when 
stock and bond prices plummet. This volatility has to be kept in mind while 
marketing variable life. 

ii. Unit linked insurance 

Unit linked plans, also known as ULIP‟s emerged as one of the most popular 
and significant products, displacing traditional plans in many markets. These 
plans were introduced in UK, in a situation of substantial investments that 
life insurance companies made in ordinary equity shares and the large 
capital gains and profits they made as a result. A need was felt for having 
both greater investment in equities and also passing the benefits to 
policyholders in a more efficient and equitable manner. 

Conventional with profit (participating) policies offer some linkage to the 
life office‟s investment performance. The linkage however is not direct. The 
policyholder‟s bonus depends on periodic (usually annual) valuation of assets 
and liabilities and resultant surplus declared, which in turn depends on 
assumptions and factors considered by the valuation actuary. 

Critical to the valuation process is the allowance for guarantees provided 
under the contract. As a result the bonus does not directly reflect the value 
of the underlying assets of the insurer. Even after the surplus is declared, 
the life insurer may still not allocate it to bonus but may decide to build 
free assets which can be used for growth and expansion.
164 
Because of all this, bonus additions to policies follow investment 
performance in a very cushioned and distant manner. 

The basic logic that governs conventional policies is to smooth investment 
returns over time. While terminal bonuses and compound bonuses have 
enabled policyholders to enjoy a larger slice of benefits of equity and other 
high yield investments, they are still dependent on the discretion of the life 
office who declares these bonuses. Again, bonuses are generally only 
declared once a year since the valuation is done only on annual basis. 
Returns would thus not reflect the daily fluctuations in the value of assets. 

Unit linked policies help to overcome both the above limitations. The 
benefits under these contracts are wholly or partially determined by the 
value of units credited to the policyholder‘s account at the date when 
payment is due. 

Unit linked policies thus provide the means for directly and immediately 
cashing on the benefits of a life insurer‟s investment performance. The units 
are usually those of a specified authorised unit trust or a segregated 
(internal) fund managed by the company. Units may be purchased by 
payment of a single premium or via regular premium payments. 

In the United Kingdom and other markets these policies were developed and 
positioned as investment vehicles with an attached insurance component. 
Their structure differs significantly from that of conventional cash value 
contracts. The latter, as we have said, are bundled. They are opaque with 
regard to their term, expenses and savings components. Unit linked 
contracts, in contrast, are unbundled. Their structure is transparent with 
the charges to pay for the insurance and expenses component being clearly 
specified. 

Diagram 2: Premium break-up 

Once these charges are deducted from the premium, the balance of the 
account and income from it is invested in units. The value of these units is 
fixed with reference to some pre-determined index of performance. 

The key point is that this value is defined by a rule or formula, which is 
outlined in advance. Typically the value of the units is given by the net
165 
asset value (NAV), which reflects the market value of assets in which the 
fund is invested. Two independent persons could arrive at the same 
benefits payable by following the formula. 

Policyholder benefits thus do not depend on the assumptions and discretion 
of the life insurance company. 

An endearing feature of unit linked policies is its facility of choosing 
between different kinds of funds, which the unit holder can exercise. Each 
fund has a different portfolio mix of assets. The investor thus gets to choose 
between a broad option of debt, balanced and equity funds. A debt fund 
implies investment of most of one‟s premiums in debt securities like gilts 
and bonds. An equity fund would imply that units are predominantly in 
equity form. Even within these broad categories there may be other types of 
options. 

Equity Fund 
Debt Fund 
Balanced 
Fund 
Money 
Market Fund 
This fund 
invests 
major 
portion of 
the money 
in equity 
and equity 
related 
instruments. 
This fund 
invests major 
portion of the 
money in 
Government 
Bonds, 
Corporate 
Bonds, Fixed 
Deposits etc. 
This fund 
invests in a 
mix of equity 
and debt 
instruments. 
This fund 
invests money 
mainly in 
instruments 
such as 
Treasury 
Bills, 
Certificates 
of Deposit, 
Commercial 
Paper etc. 

One may choose between a growth fund, predominantly invested in growth 
stocks, or a balanced fund, which balances need for income with capital 
gain. One may also choose sectoral funds, which invest only in certain 
sectors and industries. Each option that is selected must reflect one‟s risk 
profile and investment need. There is also provision to switch from one kind 
of fund to another if performance of one or more funds is not perceived to 
be up to the mark. 

All these choices also carry a qualification. The life insurer, while being 
expected to manage an efficient portfolio, does not give any guarantee 
about unit values. It is thus relieved here of the greater part of the 
investment risk. The latter is borne by the unit holder. The life insurer may 
however bear the mortality and expense risk. 

Again, unlike conventional plans, unit linked policies work on a minimum 
premium basis and not on sum assured. The insured decides on the amount 
of premium he or she wishes to contribute at regular intervals. Insurance 
cover is a multiple of the premiums paid. The insured has a choice 
between higher and lower cover. The premium may consist of two
166 
components – the term component may be placed in a guaranteed fund 
(termed as the sterling fund in UK) that would yield a minimum amount of 
cover on death. The balance of premium is used to purchase units that are 
invested in the capital market, particularly the stock market, by the insurer. 
In case of death the death benefit would be the higher of the sum assured or 
the fund value standing to one‟s account. The fund value is simply the unit 
price multiplied by the number of units in the individual‟s account. 

Test Yourself 2 

Which of the below statement is incorrect? 

I. Variable life insurance is a temporary life insurance policy 
II. Variable life insurance is a permanent life insurance policy 
III. The policy has a cash value account 
IV. The policy provides a minimum death benefit guarantee
167 
Summary 

 
A critical point of concern with respect to life insurance policies has been 
the issue of giving a competitive rate of return which is comparable to that 
of other assets in the financial marketplace. 

 
Some of the trends that led to the upswing in non-traditional life products 
include unbundling, investment linkage and transparency. 

 
Universal life insurance is a form of permanent life insurance characterised 
by its flexible premiums, flexible face amount and death benefit amounts, 
and the unbundling of its pricing factors. 

 
Variable life insurance is a kind of “Whole Life” policy where death benefit 
and cash value of the policy fluctuates according to the investment 
performance of a special investment account into which premiums are 
credited. 

 
Unit linked plans, also known as ULIP‟s emerged as one of the most popular 
and significant products, supplanting traditional plans in many markets. 

 
Unit linked policies provide the means for directly and immediately cashing 
on the benefits of a life insurer‟s investment performance. 

Key Terms 

1. Universal life insurance 
2. Variable life insurance 
3. Unit linked insurance 
4. Net asset value 

Answers to Test Yourself 

Answer 1 

The correct option is II. 

Universal life insurance is a non-traditional life insurance product. 

Answer 2 

The correct option is I. 

The statement “Variable life insurance is a temporary life insurance policy” is 
incorrect. 

The correct statement is “Variable life insurance is a permanent life insurance 
policy”.
168 
Self-Examination Questions 

Question 1 

What does inter-temporal allocation of resources refer to? 

I. Postponing allocation of resources until the time is right 
II. Allocation of resources over time 
III. Temporary allocation of resources 
IV. Diversification of resource allocation 

Question 2 

Which among the following is a limitation of traditional life insurance products? 

I. Yields on these policies is high 
II. Clear and visible method of arriving at surrender value 
III. Well defined cash and savings value component 
IV. Rate of return is not easy to ascertain 

Question 3 

Where was the Universal Life Policy introduced first? 

I. USA 
II. Great Britain 
III. Germany 
IV. France 

Question 4 

Who among the following is most likely to buy variable life insurance? 

I. People seeking fixed return 
II. People who are risk averse and do not dabble in equity 
III. Knowledgeable people comfortable with equity 
IV. Young people in general 

Question 5 

Which of the below statement is true regarding ULIP‟s? 

I. Value of the units is determined by a formula fixed in advance 
II. Investment risk is borne by the insurer 
III. ULIP‟s are opaque with regards to their term, expenses and savings 
components 
IV. ULIP‟s are bundled products
169 
Question 6 

All of the following are characteristics of variable life insurance EXCEPT: 

I. Flexible premium payments 
II. Cash value is not guaranteed 
III. Policy owner selects where savings reserve is invested 
IV. Minimum Death benefit is guaranteed 

Question 7 

Which of the below is correct with regards to universal life insurance? 

Statement I: It allows policy owner to vary payments 
Statement II: Policy owner can earn market based rate of return on cash value 

I. I is true 
II. II is true 
III. I and II are true 
IV. I and II are false 

Question 8 

All of the following is true regarding ULIP‟s EXCEPT: 

I. Unit holder can choose between different kind of funds 
II. Life insurer provides guarantee for unit values 
III. Units may be purchased by payment of a single premium or via regular 
premium payments. 
IV. ULIP policy structure is transparent with regards to the insurance expenses 
component 

Question 9 

As per IRDAI norms, an insurance company can provide which of the below non-
traditional savings life insurance products are permitted in India? 

Choice I: Unit Linked Insurance Plans 
Choice II: Variable Insurance Plans 

I. I only 
II. II only 
III. I and II both 
IV. Neither I nor II 

Question 10 

What does unbundling of life insurance products refers to? 

I. Correlation of life insurance products with bonds 
II. Correlation of life insurance products with equities 
III. Amalgamation of protection and savings element
170 
IV. Separation of the protection and savings element 

Answers to Self-Examination Questions 

Answer 1 

The correct option is II. 

Inter-temporal allocation of resources refers to allocation of resources over 
time. 

Answer 2 

The correct option is IV. 

Rate of return is not easy to ascertain in traditional life insurance products. 

Answer 3 

The correct option is I. 

Universal Life Policy was first introduced in the USA. 

Answer 4 

The correct option is III. 

Knowledgeable people comfortable with equity are most likely to buy variable 
life insurance. 

Answer 5 

The correct option is III. 

ULIP‟s are transparent with regards to their term, expenses and savings 
components. 

Answer 6 

The correct option is I. 

Premium payments are fixed and not flexible with variable life insurance. 

Answer 7 

The correct option is III. 

Both statements are true. Premium payment flexibility is a characteristic of 
universal life insurance. This form of life insurance also permits the policy 
owner to earn a rate of return tied to some market-based index.
171 

Answer 8 

The correct option is II. 

Life insurer does not provide guarantee for unit values in case of ULIP‟s. 

Answer 9 

The correct option is III. 

As per IRDAI norms non-traditional savings life insurance products permitted in 
India include unit linked insurance plans and variable insurance plans. 

Answer 10 

The correct option is IV. 

Separation of the protection and savings element refers to the unbundling of 
life insurance products.
172 
CHAPTER 10 

APPLICATIONS OF LIFE INSURANCE 

Chapter Introduction 

Life insurance does not merely seek to protect individuals from premature 
death. It has other applications as well. It can be applied to the creation of 
trusts with resultant insurance benefits; it can be applied for creating a policy 
covering key personnel of industries and also for redeeming mortgages. We shall 
briefly describe these various applications of life insurance. 

Learning Outcomes 

A. Applications of life insurance
173 

A. Applications of life insurance 

1. Married Women‘s Property Act 

The concept of Trusts in a life policy is necessitated by the applicability of 
estate duty on transfer/inheritance of benefits under a life insurance policy, 
including annuities. While with the abolition of estate duty in India, the concept 
of Trusts may no longer be preferred, it is beneficial to understand the subject 
in detail. 

Section 6 of the Married Women‟s Property Act, 1874 provides for security of 
benefits under a life insurance policy to the wife and children. Section 6 of the 
Married Women‟s Property Act, 1874 also provides for creation of a Trust. 

Diagram 1: Beneficiaries under MWP Act 

It lays down that a policy of insurance effected by any married man on his own 
life, and expressed on the face of it to be for the benefit of his wife, or of his 
wife and children, or any of them, shall ensure and be deemed to be a trust for 
the benefit of his wife, or of his wife and children, or any of them, according to 
the interest so expressed, and shall not, so long any object of the trust remains, 
be subject to the control of the husband, or to his creditors, or form part of his 
estate. 

a) Features of a policy under the MWP Act 

i. Each policy will remain a separate Trust. Either the wife or child (over 
18 years of age) can be a trustee. 

ii. The policy shall be beyond the control of court attachments, creditors 
and even the life assured. 

iii. The claim money shall be paid to the trustees.
174 
iv. The policy cannot be surrendered and neither nomination nor assignment 
is allowed. 

v. If the policyholder does not appoint a special trustee to receive and 
administer the benefits under the policy, the sum secured under the 
policy becomes payable to the official trustee of the State in which the 
office at which the insurance was effected is situated. 

b) Benefits 

The Trust is set-up under an irrevocable, non-amendable Trust Deed and can 
hold one or more insurance policies. It is important to appoint a trustee for 
administration of the Trust property, being the benefits under the life 
policy. By creating a Trust to hold the insurance policies, the policyholder 
gives up his rights under the policy and upon the death of the life insured. 
The trustee invests the insurance proceeds and administers the Trust for one 
or more beneficiaries. 

While it is a practice to create the Trust for the benefit of the spouse and 
children, the beneficiaries can be any other legal person. Creating a Trust 
ensures that the policy proceeds are invested wisely during the minority of 
the beneficiary and also secures the benefits against future creditors. 

2. Key man Insurance 

Keyman insurance is an important form of business insurance. 

Definition 

Keyman Insurance can be described as an insurance policy taken out by a 
business to compensate that business for financial losses that would arise from 
the death or extended incapacity of an important member of the business. 

To put it simply, key man insurance is a life insurance that is used for business 
protection purposes. The policy's term does not extend beyond the period of the 
key person‟s usefulness to the business. Key man insurance policies are usually 
owned by the business and the aim is to compensate the business for losses 
incurred with the loss of a key income generator and facilitate business 
continuity. Keyman insurance does not indemnify the actual losses incurred but 
compensates with a fixed monetary sum as specified on the insurance policy. 

Many businesses have a key person who is responsible for the majority of 
profits, or has a unique and hard to replace skill set such as intellectual 
property that is vital to the organisation. An employer may take out a key 
person insurance policy on the life or health of any employee whose knowledge, 
work, or overall contribution is considered uniquely valuable to the company. 

The employer does this to offset the costs (such as hiring temporary help or 
recruiting a successor) and losses (such as a decreased ability to transact
175 
business until successors are trained) which the employer is likely to suffer in 
the event of the loss of a key person. 

Keyman is a term insurance policy where the sum assured is linked to the 
profitability of the company rather than the key person‟s own income. The 
premium is paid by the company. This is tax efficient as the entire premium is 
treated as business expense. In case the key person dies, the benefit is paid to 
the company. Unlike individual insurance policies, the death benefit in key man 
insurance is taxed as income. Other types of plans are not allowed under key 
man insurance 

The insurer will look at the business‟ audited financial statements and filed IT 
returns in assessing the sum assured. Generally, the company must be profitable 
to be eligible for keyman insurance. In a few cases, insurers make exceptions 
for loss making but well-funded start-up companies. 

a) Who can be a keyman? 

A key person can be anyone directly associated with the business whose loss 
can cause financial strain to the business. For example, the person could be 
a director of the company, a partner, a key sales person, key project 
manager, or someone with specific skills or knowledge which is especially 
valuable to the company. 

b) Insurable losses 

The following losses are those for which key person insurance can provide 
compensation: 

i. Losses related to the extended period when a key person is unable to 
work, to provide temporary personnel and, if necessary to finance the 
recruitment and training of a replacement 

ii. Insurance to protect profits. For example, offsetting lost income from 
lost sales, losses resulting from the delay or cancellation of any business 
project that the key person was involved in, loss of opportunity to 
expand, loss of specialised skills or knowledge 

3. Mortgage Redemption Insurance (MRI) 

Suppose you are taking a loan to buy a property. You may be required to pay for 
mortgage redemption insurance by the bank as part of the loan arrangement. 

a) What is MRI? 

It is an insurance policy that provides financial protection for home loan 
borrowers. It is basically a decreasing term life insurance policy taken by a 
mortgagor to repay the balance on a mortgage loan if he/she dies before its 
full repayment. It can be called a loan protector policy. This plan is suitable
176 
for elderly people whose dependents may need assistance in clearing their 
debts in case of the unexpected demise of the policyholder. 

b) Features 

The policy bears on surrender value or maturity benefits. The insurance 
cover under this policy decreases each year unlike a term insurance policy 
where insurance cover is constant during the policy period. 

Test Yourself 1 

What is the objective behind Mortgage Redemption Insurance? 

I. Facilitate cheaper mortgage rates 
II. Provide financial protection for home loan borrowers 
III. Protect value of the mortgaged property 
IV. Evade eviction in case of default
177 

Summary 

 
Section 6 of the Married Women‟s Property Act, 1874 provides for security of 
benefits under a life insurance policy to the wife and children. 

 
The policy effected under MWP Act shall be beyond the control of court 
attachments, creditors and even the life assured. 

 
Keyman insurance is an important form of business insurance. It can be 
described as an insurance policy taken out by a business to compensate at 
for financial losses that would arise from the death or extended capacity of 
an important member of the business. 

 
Mortgage redemption insurance is basically a decreasing term life insurance 
policy taken by a mortgagor to repay the balance on a mortgage loan if 
he/she dies before its full repayment. 

Key Terms 

1. Married Women‟s Property Act 
2. Keyman insurance 
3. Mortgage Redemption Insurance 

Answers to Test Yourself 

Answer 1 

The correct option is II. 

MRI provides financial protection for home loan borrowers. 

Self-Examination Questions 

Question 1 

The sum assured under keyman insurance policy is generally linked to which of 
the following? 

I. Keyman income 
II. Business profitability 
III. Business history 
IV. Inflation index
178 
Question 2 

Mortgage redemption insurance (MRI) can be categorised under ________. 
I. Increasing term life assurance 
II. Decreasing term life assurance 
III. Variable life assurance 
IV. Universal life assurance 

Question 3 

Which of the below losses are covered under keyman insurance? 

I. Property theft 
II. Losses related to the extended period when a key person is unable to work 
III. General liability 
IV. Losses caused due to errors and omission 

Question 4 

A policy is effected under the MWP Act. If the policyholder does not appoint a 
special trustee to receive and administer the benefits under the policy, the sum 
secured under the policy becomes payable to the _____________. 

I. Next of kin 
II. Official Trustee of the State 
III. Insurer 
IV. Insured 

Question 5 

Mahesh ran a business on borrowed capital. After his sudden demise, all the 
creditors are doing their best to go after Mahesh‟s assets. Which of the below 
assets is beyond the reach of the creditors? 

I. Property under Mahesh‟s name 
II. Mahesh‟s bank accounts 
III. Term life insurance policy purchased under Section 6 of MWP Act 
IV. Mutual funds owned by Mahesh 

Question 6 

Which of the below option is true with regards to MWP Act cases? 

Statement I: Maturity claims cheques are paid to policyholders 
Statement II: Maturity claims cheques are paid to trustees 

I. I is true 
II. II is true 
III. Both I and II are true 
IV. Neither I nor II is true
179 

Question 7 

Which of the below option is true with regards to MWP act cases? 

Statement I: Death claims are settled in favour of nominees 
Statement II: Death claims are settled in favour of trustees 

I. I is true 
II. II is true 
III. Both I and II are true 
IV. Neither I nor II is true 

Question 8 

Ajay pays insurance premium for his employees. Which of the below insurance 
premium will not be treated deductible as compensation paid to employee? 

Choice I: Health insurance with benefits payable to employee 
Choice II: Keyman life insurance with benefits payable to Ajay 

I. I only 
II. II only 
III. Both I and II 
IV. Neither I nor II 

Question 9 

The practice of charging interest to borrowers who pledge their property as 
collateral but leaving them in possession of the property is called 
_____________. 

I. Security 
II. Mortgage 
III. Usury 
IV. Hypothecation 

Question 10 

Which of the below policy can provide protection to home loan borrowers? 

I. Life Insurance 
II. Disability Insurance 
III. Mortgage Redemption Insurance 
IV. General Insurance
180 
Answers to Self-Examination Questions 

Answer 1 

The correct option is II. 

Sum assured under keyman insurance policy is generally linked to business 
profitability. 

Answer 2 

The correct option is II. 

Mortgage redemption insurance (MRI) can be categorised under decreasing term 
life assurance. 

Answer 3 

The correct option is II. 

Losses related to the extended period when a key person is unable to work are 
covered under keyman insurance. 

Answer 4 

The correct option is II. 

If the policyholder does not appoint a special trustee to receive and administer 
the benefits under the policy, the sum secured under the policy becomes 
payable to the Official Trustee of the State. 
Answer 5 

The correct option is III. 

Term life insurance policy purchased under Section 6 of MWP Act is beyond the 
reach of court attachments and creditors. 

Answer 6 

The correct option is II. 

Maturity claims cheques are paid to trustees. 

Answer 7 

The correct option is II. 

Death claims are settled in favour of trustees. 

Answer 8 

The correct option is II.
181 

Keyman life insurance with benefits payable to Ajay will not be treated 
deductible as compensation paid to employee. 

Answer 9 

The correct option is II. 

The practice of charging interest to borrowers who pledge their property as 
collateral but leaving them in possession of the property is called mortgage. 

Answer 10 

The correct option is III. 

Mortgage Redemption Insurance can provide protection to home loan borrowers.
182 
CHAPTER 11 

PRICING AND VALUATION IN LIFE INSURANCE 

Chapter Introduction 

The objective of this chapter is to introduce to the learner the basic 
elements that are involved in the pricing and benefits of life insurance 
contracts. We shall first discuss the elements that constitute the 
premium and then discuss the concept of surplus and bonus. 

Learning Outcomes 

A. Insurance pricing – basic elements 
B. Surplus and bonus
183 
A. Insurance pricing – Basic elements 

1. Premium 

In ordinary language, the term premium denotes the price that is paid by 
an insured for purchasing an insurance policy. It is normally expressed as 
a rate of premium per thousand rupees of sum assured. 

 These premium rates are available in the form of tables of rates that are 
available with insurance companies. 

Diagram 1: Premium 

The rates that are printed in these tables are known as “Office 
Premiums”. They are typically level annual premiums which implies that 
the same premium needs to be paid every year during the term of the 
policy. They are in most cases the same throughout the term and are 
expressed as an annual rate. 

Example 

If the premium for a twenty year endowment policy for a given age is Rs. 
4,800, it means that Rs. 4,800 has to be paid each year for twenty years. 

However it is possible to have some policies in which the premiums are 
payable only in the first few years. Companies also have single premium
184 
contracts in which only one premium is payable at the beginning of the 
contract. These policies are usually investment oriented. 

2. Rebates 

Life insurance companies may also offer certain types of rebates on the 
premium that is payable. Two such rebates are: 

 For sum assured 
 For mode of premium 

a) Rebate for sum assured 

The rebate for sum assured is offered to those who buy policies with 
higher amounts of sum assured. It is offered as a way of passing on to 
the customer, the gains that the insurer may make when servicing 
higher value policies. The reason for this is simple. Whether an 
insurer services a policy for Rs.50,000 or Rs.5,00,000, the amount of 
effort required for both, and consequently, the cost of processing 
these policies remain the same. But higher sum assured policies yield 
more premium and so more profits. 

b) Rebate for mode of premium 

Similarly a rebate may be offered for the mode of premium. Life 
insurance companies may allow premiums to be paid on annual, half 
yearly, quarterly or monthly basis. More frequent the mode, more 
the cost of service. Yearly and half yearly modes involve collection 
and accounting only once a year while quarterly and monthly modes 
would mean the process is more frequent. Half-yearly or yearly 
premiums thus enable a saving in administrative costs as compared to 
quarterly or monthly modes. Moreover, in the yearly mode, the 
insurer can utilise this amount during the entire year and earn 
interest on it. Insurers would hence encourage payment via yearly and 
half yearly modes by allowing a rebate on these. They may also 
charge a little extra for monthly mode of payments, to cover 
additional administrative expenses involved.