A maturity or death claim or a surrender leads to termination of the insurance 
cover under the contract and no further insurance cover is available. This is 
irrespective of whether the claim is actually paid or not. Non-payment of a 
claim does not assure the continuity of insurance cover under the contract.
292 
3. Types of claims 

The following payments may occur during the policy term: 

a) Survival Benefit Payments 

Periodical payments are made by the insurer to the insured at 
specified times during the term of the policy. The policy bond is 
returned to the policyholder bearing an endorsement of payments 
made after each survival benefit instalment. 

b) Surrender of Policy 

The policyholder opts for a premature closure of his policy. This is a 
voluntary termination of the policy contract. A policy can be surrendered 
only if it has acquired paid-up value. The amount payable to the 
insured is the surrender value which is usually a percentage of the 
premiums paid. There is also a minimum guaranteed surrender value 
(GSV), but the actual surrender value paid to the insured is more 
than the GSV. 

c) Rider Benefit 

A payment under a rider is made by an insurance company on the 
occurrence of a specified event according to the terms and 
conditions. 

Under a critical illness rider, in the event of diagnosis of a critical 
illness, a specified amount is paid as per terms. The illness should 
have been covered in the list of critical illnesses specified by the 
insurance company. 

Under hospital care rider, the insurer pays the treatment costs in the event 
of hospitalisation of the insured, subject to terms and conditions. 

The policy contract continues even after the rider payments are made. 

The following claim payments are made at the end of the policy term 
specified in the insurance contract. 

d) Maturity Claim 

In such claims, the insurer promises to pay the insured a specified amount at 
the end of the term, if the insured survives the plan‟s entire term. This is 
known as a maturity claim. 

i. Participating Plan: The amount payable under a maturity claim, if 
participating, is the sum assured plus accumulated bonuses less dues 
such as outstanding premium and policy loans and interests thereon.
293 
ii. Return of Premium (ROP) Plan: In some cases premiums paid over 
the term period are returned when the policy matures. 

iii. Unit Linked Insurance Plan (ULIP): In case of ULIPs, the insurer pays 
the fund value as the maturity claim. 

iv. Money-back Plan: In case of money-back policy, the insurer pays 
the maturity claim minus the survival benefits received during the 
term of the policy. 

The insurance contact terminates after the claim is paid. 

e) Death Claim 

If the insured expires during the term of his / her policy, accidentally 
or otherwise, the insurer pays the sum assured plus accumulated 
bonuses, if participating, less dues like outstanding policy loan and 
premia plus interest there on respectively. This is the death claim, 
which is paid to the nominee or assignee or legal whatever the 
situation may be. A death claim marks the end of the contract as a result 
of death. 

A death claim may be: 

 Early (less than three years policy duration) or 
 Non-early (more than three years) 

The nominee or assignee or legal heir has to intimate the insurer of 
the cause, date and place of death. 

i. Forms to be submitted for death claim 

The following forms are to be submitted by the beneficiary with the 
insurer to facilitate processing of the claim: 

 Claim form by nominee 

 Certificate of burial or cremation
294 

 Treating physician‟s certificate 

 Hospital‟s certificate 

 Employer‟s certificate 

 Certified court copies of police reports like First Information 
Report (FIR), Inquest Report, Post-Mortem Report, Final Report 
which are required in case of death by accident. 

 Death certificate issued by municipal authorities etc as proof of 
death 

Diagram 3: Forms to be submitted for Death Claim 

ii. Repudiation of death claim 

The death claim may be paid or repudiated. While processing the claim, if it 
is detected by the insurer that the proposer had made any incorrect 
statements or had suppressed material facts relevant to the policy, the 
contract becomes void. All benefits under the policy are forfeited. 
iii. Section 45: Indisputability Clause 

However this penalty is subject to Section 45 of the Insurance Act, 
1938.
295 
Important 

Section 45 states: 

 No policy of life insurance shall be called in question on any ground 
whatsoever after the expiry of three years from the date of the 
policy, i.e from the date of issuance of the policy or the date of 
commencement of risk or the date of revival of the policy or the 
date of the rider to the policy, whichever is later. 

iv. Presumption of Death 

Sometimes a person is reported missing without any information 
about his whereabouts. The Indian Evidence Act provides for 
presumption of death in such cases, if he has not been heard of 
for seven years. If the nominee or heirs claim that the life 
insured is missing and must be presumed to be dead, insurers 
insist on a decree from a competent court. It is necessary that 
premiums should be paid till the court decrees presumption of 
death. Insurers may, as a matter of concession, waive the premiums 
during the seven year period. 

4. Claim Procedure for Life Insurance Policy 

The IRDAI (Protection of Policyholders Interests) Regulations, 2002 provides as 
follows: 

Regulation 8: Claims procedure in respect of a life insurance policy 

i. A life insurance policy shall state the primary documents which are 
normally required to be submitted by a claimant in support of a claim. 

ii. A life insurance company, upon receiving a claim, shall process the 
claim without delay. Any queries or requirement of additional 
documents, to the extent possible, shall be raised all at once and not in 
a piece-meal manner, within a period of 15 days of the receipt of the 
claim. 

iii. A claim under a life policy shall be paid or be disputed giving all the 
relevant reasons, within 30 days from the date of receipt of all relevant 
papers and clarifications required. However, where the circumstances of 
a claim warrant an investigation in the opinion of the insurance 
company, it shall initiate and complete such investigation at the 
earliest. Where in the opinion of the insurance company the 
circumstances of a claim warrant an investigation, it shall initiate and 
complete such investigation at the earliest, in any case not later than 6 
months from the time of lodging the claim.
296 

iv. Subject to the provisions of Section 47 of the Act, where a claim is ready 
for payment but the payment cannot be made due to any reasons of a 
proper identification of the payee, the life insurer shall hold the amount 
for the benefit of the payee and such an amount shall earn interest at 
the rate applicable to a savings bank account with a scheduled bank 
(effective from 30 days following the submission of all papers and 
information). 

v. Where there is a delay on the part of the insurer in processing a claim 
for a reason other than the one covered by sub-regulation (iv), the life 
insurance company shall pay interest on the claim amount at a rate 
which is 2% above the bank rate prevalent at the beginning of the 
financial year in which the claim is reviewed by it. 

5. Role of an agent 

An agent shall render all possible service to the nominee/legal heir or the 
beneficiary in filling up of claim forms accurately and assisting in submission of 
these at the insurer‟s office. 

Apart from discharging obligations, goodwill is generated from such a situation 
whereby there exists ample opportunity for the agent to procure business or 
referrals in future from the family of the deceased. 

Test Yourself 1 

Which of the below statement best describes the concept of claim? Choose the 
most appropriate option. 

I. A claim is a request that the insurer should make good the promise specified 
in the contract 
II. A claim is a demand that the insurer should make good the promise specified 
in the contract 
III. A claim is a demand that the insured should make good the commitment 
specified in the agreement 
IV. A claim is a request that the insured should make good the promise specified 
in the agreement
297 
Summary 

 
A claim is a demand that the insurer should make good the promise specified 
in the contract. 

 
A claim can be survival claim or death claim. While a death claim arises only 
upon the death of the life assured, survival claims can be caused by one or 
more events 

 
For payment of a survival claim, the insurer has to ascertain that the event 
has occurred as per the conditions stipulated in the policy. 

 
The following payments may occur during the policy term: 

 Survival Benefit Payments 
 Surrender of Policy 
 Rider Benefit 
 Maturity Claim 
 Death Claim 

 
Section 45 (Indisputability Clause) of the Insurance Act offers protection 
against rejection of claim by the insurer on flimsy grounds provided and 
sets a time limit of 3 years for the Insurer for calling a policy into question. 

 
Under the IRDAI (Protection of Policyholders Interests) Regulations, 2002, 
the IRDAI has laid down regulations to safeguard / protect the insured or 
beneficiary in case of claims.
298 

Answers to Test Yourself 

Answer 1 

The correct option is II. 

A claim is a demand that the insurer should make good the promise specified in 
the contract. 

Self-Examination Questions 

Question 1 

Given below is a list of policies. Identify under which type of policy, the claim 
payment is made in the form of periodic payments? 

I. Money-back policy 
II. Unit linked insurance policy 
III. Return of premium policy 
IV. Term insurance policy 

Question 2 

Mahesh has bought a life insurance policy with a critical illness rider. He has 
made absolute assignment of the policy in favour of Karan. Mahesh suffers a 
heart attack and there is a claim of Rs. 50,000 under the critical illness rider. 
To whom will the payment be made in this case? 

I. Mahesh 
II. Karan 
III. The payment will be shared equally by Mahesh and Karan 
IV. Neither of the two because Mahesh has suffered the heart attack but the 
policy is assigned in favour of Karan. 

Question 3 

Praveen died in a car accident. The beneficiary submits documents for death 
claim. Which of the below document is an additional document required to be 
submitted in case of accidental death as compared to natural death. 

I. Certificate of burial or cremation 
II. Treating physician‟s certificate 
III. Employer‟s certificate 
IV. Inquest Report
299 

Question 4 

Which of the below death claim will be treated as an early death claim? 

I. If the insured dies within three years of policy duration 
II. If the insured dies within five years of policy duration 
III. If the insured dies within seven years of policy duration 
IV. If the insured dies within ten years of policy duration 

Question 5 

Given below are some events that will trigger survival claims. Identify which of 
the below statement is incorrect? 

I. Claim paid on maturity of a term insurance policy 
II. An instalment payable upon reaching the milestone under a money-back 
policy 
III. Claim paid for critical illnesses covered under the policy as a rider benefit 
IV. Surrender value paid on surrender of an endowment policy by the 
policyholder 

Question 6 

A payment made under a money-back policy upon reaching a milestone will be 
classified under which type of claim? 

I. Death claim 
II. Maturity claim 
III. Periodical survival claim 
IV. Surrender claim 

Question 7 

Shankar bought a 10 year Unit Linked Insurance Plan. If he dies before the 
maturity of the policy which of the below will be paid? 

I. Lower of sum assured or fund value 
II. Higher of sum assured or fund value 
III. Premiums paid will be returned with 2% higher interest rate as compared to 
a bank‟s savings deposit 
IV. Surrender value 

Question 8 

Based on classification of claims (early or non-early), pick the odd one out? 

I. Ramya dies after 6 months of buying a term insurance plan 
II. Manoj dies after one and half years of buying a term insurance plan 
III. David dies after two and half years of buying a term insurance plan 
IV. Pravin dies after five and half years of buying a term insurance plan
300 
Question 9 

Given below is a list of documents to be submitted for a normal death claim by 
all beneficiaries in the event of death of life insured. Pick the odd one out 
which is additionally required to be submitted only in case of death by accident. 

I. Inquest report 
II. Claim form 
III. Certificate of burial or cremation 
IV. Hospital‟s certificate 

Question 10 

As per IRDAI (Protection of Policyholders Interests) Regulations, 2002, a claim 
under a life policy shall be paid or be disputed, within 30 days from the date of 
receipt of all relevant papers and clarifications required. 

I. 7 days 
II. 15 days 
III. 30 days 
IV. 45 days 

Answers to Self-Examination Questions 

Answer 1 

The correct option is I 

In case of a money-back policy the claim payment is made in the form of 
periodic payments. 

Answer 2 

The correct option is II 

In this case the entire payment of Rs. 50,000 will be made to Karan as the 
policy has been assigned in favour of Karan on an absolute basis. 

Answer 3 

The correct option is IV 

Documents like claim form by nominee, Certificate of burial or cremation, 
Treating physician‟s certificate, Hospital‟s certificate, Employer‟s certificate 
etc. are required to be submitted in case of natural death as well as accidental 
death. 

First Information Report (FIR), Inquest Report, Post-Mortem Report, Final Report 
etc. are additional documents required to be submitted in case of accidental 
death as compared to natural death.
301 
Answer 4 

The correct option is I 

If the insured dies within three years of policy duration, the death claim will be 
treated as early death claim. 

Answer 5 

The correct option is I 

Option I is incorrect. There is no claim paid on maturity of a term insurance 
policy. 

Answer 6 

The correct option is III 

A payment made under a money-back policy upon reaching a milestone will be 
classified under periodic survival claim. 

Answer 7 

The correct option is II 

If Shankar dies before the maturity of the ULIP policy, higher of sum assured or 
fund value will be paid. 

Answer 8 

The correct option is IV 

Option IV is the odd one out because it will be treated as a non-early claim. 
Option I, II and III will be treated as early claims. 

Answer 9 

The correct option is I 

Inquest report is additionally required to be submitted in case of death by 
accident. The other documents like claim form, certificate of burial or 
cremation, hospital‟s certificate are required to be submitted by all 
beneficiaries in the event of death of life insured 

Answer 10 

The correct option is III 

As per IRDAI (Protection of Policyholders Interests) Regulations, 2002, a claim 
under a life policy shall be paid or be disputed, within 30 days from the date of 
receipt of all relevant papers and clarifications required.
302 

SECTION 3 

HEALTH SECTION
303 
 CHAPTER 17 

INTRODUCTION TO HEALTH INSURANCE 
Chapter Introduction 

This chapter will tell you about how insurance evolved over time. It will also 
explain what healthcare is, levels of healthcare and types of healthcare. You 
will also learn about the healthcare system in India and factors affecting it. 
Finally, it will explain how health insurance evolved in India and also the various 
players in the health insurance market in India. 

Learning Outcomes 

A. What is Healthcare 
B. Levels of Healthcare 
C. Types of Healthcare 
D. Factors affecting health systems in India 
E. Evolution of Health Insurance in India 
F. Health Insurance Market 

After studying this chapter, you should be able to: 

1. Understand how insurance evolved. 
2. Explain the concept of healthcare and the types and levels of healthcare. 
3. Appreciate the factors affecting healthcare in India and the progress made 
since independence. 
4. Discuss the evolution of health insurance in India. 
5. Know the health insurance market in India.
304 
A. What is Healthcare 

You have heard of the saying “Health is Wealth”. Have you ever tried to know 
what Health actually means? The word „Health‟ was derived from the word 
„hoelth‟, which means „soundness of the body‟. 

In olden days, health was considered to be a „Divine Gift‟ and illness was 
believed to have been caused due to the sins committed by the concerned 
person. It was Hippocrates (460 to 370 BC) who came up with the reasons 
behind illness. According to him, illness is caused due to various factors relating 
to environment, sanitation, personal hygiene and diets. 

The Indian system of Ayurveda which existed many centuries before 
Hippocrates, considered health as a delicate balance of four fluids: blood, 
yellow bile, black bile and phlegm and an imbalance of these fluids causes ill 
health. Susruta, the Father of Indian medicine is even credited with complex 
surgeries unknown to the West in those times. 

Over a period of time, modern medicine has evolved into a complex science and 
the goal of modern medicine is no longer mere treatment of sickness but 
includes prevention of disease and promotion of quality of life. A widely 
accepted definition of health is the one given by World Health Organisation in 
1948; it states that “Health is a state of complete physical, mental and social 
wellbeing and not merely the absence of disease”. It is to be noted that Indian 
system of medicine like Ayurveda incorporated such a complete view of health 
from times immemorial. 

Definition 

World Health Organisation (WHO): Health is a state of complete physical, 
mental and social wellbeing and not merely the absence of disease. 

Determinants of health 

It is generally believed that the following factors determine the health of any 
individual: 

a) Lifestyle factors 

Lifestyle factors are those which are mostly in the control of the individual 
concerned e.g. exercising and eating within limits, avoiding worry and the 
like leading to good health; and bad lifestyles and habits such as smoking, 
drug abuse, unprotected sex and sedentary life style (with no exercise) etc. 
leading to diseases such as cancer, aids, hypertension and diabetes, to name 
a few. 

Though the Government plays a critical role in controlling / influencing such 
behaviour (e.g. punishing people with non-bailable imprisonment who abuse 
drugs, imposing high taxes on tobacco products etc.), the personal
305 
responsibility of an individual plays a deciding role in controlling diseases 
due to life style factors. 

b) Environmental factors 

Safe drinking water, sanitation and nutrition are crucial to health, lack of 
which leads to serious health issues as seen all over the world, especially in 
developing countries. Communicable diseases like Influenza and Chickenpox 
etc. are spread due to bad hygiene, diseases like Malaria and Dengue are 
spread due to bad environmental sanitation, while certain diseases are also 
caused due to environmental factors e.g. people working in certain 
manufacturing industries are prone to diseases related to occupational 
hazards such as Asbestos in workers in asbestos manufacture and also 
diseases of the lungs in coal miners. 

c) Genetic factors 

Diseases may be passed on from parents to children through genes. Such 
genetic factors result in differing health trends amongst the population 
spread across the globe based on race, geographical location and even 
communities. 

It is quite obvious that a country‟s social and economic progress depends on the 
health of its people. A healthy population not only provides productive 
workforce for economic activity but also frees precious resources which is all 
the more crucial for a developing country like India. At an individual level, ill 
health can cause loss of livelihood, inability to perform daily essential activities 
and push people to poverty and even commit suicide. 

Thus the world over, governments take measures to provide for health and 
wellbeing of their people and ensuring access and affordability of healthcare for 
all citizens. Thus „spend‟ on healthcare usually forms a significant part of every 
country‟s GDP. 

This poses a question as to whether different types of healthcare are required 
for different situations.
306 
B. Levels of healthcare 

Healthcare is nothing but a set of services provided by various agencies and 
providers including the government, to promote, maintain, monitor or restore 
health of people. Health care to be effective must be: 
 
Appropriate to the needs of the people 
 
Comprehensive 
 
Adequate 
 
Easily available 
 
Affordable 

Health status of a person varies from person to person. It is neither feasible nor 
necessary to make the infrastructure available at same level for all types of 
health problems. The health care facilities should be based upon the probability 
of the incidence of disease for the population. For example, a person may get 
fever, cold, cough, skin allergies etc. many times a year, but the probability of 
him/her suffering from Hepatitis B is less as compared to cold and cough. 

Similarly, the probability of the same person suffering from a critical illness 
such as heart disease or Cancer is less as compared to Hepatitis B. Hence, the 
need to set up the healthcare facilities in any area whether a village or a 
district or a state will be based upon the various health care factors called 
indicators of that area such as: 

 Size of population 
 Death rate 
 Sickness rate 
 Disability rate 
 Social and mental health of the people 
 General nutritional status of the people 
 Environmental factors such as if it is a mining area or an industrial area 
 The possible health care provider system e.g. heart doctors may not be 
readily available in a village but may be in a district town 
 How much of the health care system is likely to be used 
 Socio-economic factors such as affordability 

Based on the above factors, the government decides upon setting up of centres 
for primary, secondary and tertiary health care and takes other measures to 
make appropriate healthcare affordable and accessible to the population.
307 
C. Types of Healthcare 

Healthcare is broadly categorized as follows: 

1. Primary healthcare 

Primary health care refers to the services offered by the doctors, nurses and 
other small clinics which are contacted first by the patient for any sickness, 
that is to say that primary healthcare provider is the first point of contact for 
all patients within a health system. 

In developed countries, more attention is paid to primary health care so as to 
deal with health issues before the same become widespread, complicated and 
chronic or severe. Primary health care establishments also focus on preventive 
health care, vaccinations, awareness, medical counselling etc. and refer the 
patient to the next level of specialists when required. 

For example, if a person visits a doctor for fever and the first diagnosis is 
indicative of Dengue fever, the primary health care provider will prescribe some 
medicines but also direct the patient to get admitted in a hospital for 
specialized treatment. For most of the primary care cases, the doctor acts like 
a „Family Doctor‟ where all the members of the family visit the doctor for any 
minor sickness. 

This method also helps the medical practitioner in prescribing for symptoms 
based on genetic factors and give medical advice appropriately. For example, 
the doctor will advise a patient with parental diabetic history to be watchful of 
the lifestyle from young age to avoid diabetes to the extent possible. 

At a country level, Primary Health care centres are set up both by Government 
and private players. Government primary health care centres are established 
depending upon the population size and are present right up to the village level 
in some form or the other. 

2. Secondary healthcare 

Secondary health care refers to the healthcare services provided by medical 
specialists and other health professionals who generally do not have first 
contact with patient. It includes acute care requiring treatment for a short 
period for a serious illness, often (but not necessarily) as an in-patient, 
including Intensive Care services, ambulance facilities, pathology, diagnostic 
and other relevant medical services. 

Most of the times, the patients are referred to the secondary care by primary 
health care providers / primary physician. In some instances, the secondary 
care providers also run an „In-house‟ Primary healthcare facility in order to 
provide integrated services.
308 
Mostly, the secondary health care providers are present at the Taluk / Block 
level depending upon the population size. 

3. Tertiary healthcare 

Tertiary Health care is specialized consultative healthcare, usually for 
inpatients and on referral from primary/secondary care providers. The tertiary 
care providers are present mostly in the state capitals and a few at the district 
headquarters. 

Examples of Tertiary Health care providers are those who have advanced 
medical facilities and medical professionals, beyond the scope of secondary 
health care providers e.g. Oncology (cancer treatment), Organ Transplant 
facilities, High risk pregnancy specialists etc. 

It is to be noted that as the level of care increases, the expenses associated 
with the care also increase. While people may find it relatively easy to pay for 
the primary care, it becomes difficult for them to spend when it comes to 
secondary care and much more difficult when it comes to tertiary care. The 
infrastructure for different levels of care also varies from country to country, 
rural-urban areas, while socio-economic factors also influence the same.
309 
D. Factors affecting the health systems in India 

The Indian health system has had and continues to face many problems and 
challenges. These, in turn, affect the nature and extent of the healthcare 
system and the requirement at the individual level and healthcare organization 
at the structural level. These are discussed below: 

1. Demographic or Population related trends 

a) 
India is second largest populated country in the world. 

b) 
This exposes us to the problems associated with population growth. 

c) 
The level of poverty has also had its effect on the people‟s ability to pay 
for medical care. 

2. Social trends 

a) 
Increase in urbanization or people moving from rural to urban areas has 
posed challenges in providing healthcare. 

b) 
Health issues in rural areas also remain, mainly due to lack of availability 
and accessibility to medical facilities as well as affordability. 

c) 
The move to a more sedentary lifestyle with reduced need to exercise 
oneself has led to newer types of diseases like diabetes and high blood 
pressure. 

3. Life expectancy 

a) 
Life expectancy refers to the expected number of years that a child born 
today will survive. 

b) 
Life expectancy has increased from 30 years at the time of 
independence to over 60 years today but does not address the issues 
related to quality of that longer lifespan. 

c) 
This leads to a new concept of „healthy life expectancy‟. 

d) 
This also requires the creation of infrastructure for „Geriatric‟ (old age 
related) diseases.
310 
E. Evolution of Health Insurance in India 

While the government had been busy with its policy decisions on 
healthcare, it also put in place health insurance schemes. Insurance 
companies came with their health insurance policies only later. Here is how 
health insurance developed in India: 

a) Employees‘ State Insurance Scheme 

Health Insurance in India formally began with the beginning of the 
Employees‟ State Insurance Scheme, introduced vide the ESI Act, 1948, 
shortly after the country‟s independence in 1947. This scheme was 
introduced for blue-collar workers employed in the formal private sector 
and provides comprehensive health services through a network of its own 
dispensaries and hospitals. 

ESIC (Employees State Insurance Corporation) is the implementing agency 
which runs its own hospitals and dispensaries and also contracts 
public/private providers wherever its own facilities are inadequate. 

All workers earning wages up to Rs. 15,000 are covered under the 
contributory scheme wherein employee and employer contribute 1.75% and 
4.75% of pay roll respectively; state governments contribute 12.5% of the 
medical expenses. 

The benefits covered include: 

a) Free comprehensive healthcare at ESIS facilities 

b) Maternity benefit 

c) Disability benefit 

d) Cash compensation for loss of wages due to sickness and survivorship 
and 

e) Funeral expenses in case of death of worker 

It is also supplemented by services purchased from authorized medical 
attendants and private hospitals. The ESIS covers over 65.5 million 
beneficiaries as of March 2012. 

b) Central Government Health Scheme 

The ESIS was soon followed by the Central Government Health Scheme 
(CGHS), which was introduced in 1954 for the central government employees 
including pensioners and their family members working in civilian jobs. It 
aims to provide comprehensive medical care to employees and their families
311 
and is partly funded by the employees and largely by the employer (central 
government). 

The services are provided through CGHS‟s own dispensaries, polyclinics and 
empanelled private hospitals. 

It covers all systems of medicine, emergency services in allopathic system, 
free drugs, pathology and radiology, domiciliary visits to seriously ill 
patients, specialist consultations etc. 

The contribution from employees is quite nominal though progressively 
linked to salary scale – Rs.15 per month to Rs.150 per month. 

In 2010, CGHS had a membership base of over 800,000 families representing 
over 3 million beneficiaries. 

c) Commercial health insurance 

Commercial health insurance was offered by some of the non-life insurers 
before as well as after nationalisation of insurance industry. But, as it was 
mostly loss making for the insurers, in the beginning, it was largely available 
for corporate clients only and that too for a limited extent. 

In 1986, the first standardised health insurance product for individuals and 
their families was launched in the Indian market by all the four nationalized 
non-life insurance companies (these were then the subsidiaries of the 
General Insurance Corporation of India). This product, Mediclaim was 
introduced to provide coverage for the hospitalisation expenses up to a 
certain annual limit of indemnity with certain exclusions such as maternity, 
pre-existing diseases etc. It underwent several rounds of revisions as the 
market evolved, the last being in 2012. 

However, even after undergoing several revisions, the hospitalization 
indemnity-based annual contract continues to be the most popular form of 
private health insurance in India today, led by the current versions of 
Mediclaim. So popular is this product that private health insurance products 
are often termed by many people as „Mediclaim covers‟ considering it as a 
product category rather than a specific product offered by the insurers. 

With private players coming into the insurance sector in 2001, health 
insurance has grown tremendously but there is a large untapped market 
even today. Considerable variations in covers, exclusions and newer add-on 
covers have been introduced which will be discussed in later chapters. 

Today, more than 300 health insurance products are available in the Indian 
market.
312 
F. Health Insurance Market 

The health insurance market today consists of a number of players some 
providing the health care facilities called providers, others the insurance 
services and also various intermediaries. Some form the basic infrastructure 
while others provide support facilities. Some are in the government sector while 
others are in the private sector. These are briefly described below: 

A. INFRASTRUCTURE: 

1. Public health sector 

The Public health system operates at the national level, state level, district 
level and to a limited extent at the village level where, to implement the 
national health policies in villages, community volunteers have been involved to 
serve as links between the village community and government infrastructure. 
These include: 

a) The Anganwadi workers (1 for every 1,000 population) who are enrolled 
under the nutrition supplementation programme and the Integrated 
Child Development Service scheme (ICDS) of Ministry of Human Resource 
Development. 

b) The Trained Birth Attendants (TBA) and the Village Health guides (an 
earlier scheme of health departments in states). 

c) ASHA (Accredited Social Health Activist) volunteers, selected by the 
community under the NRHM (National Rural Health Mission) programme, 
who are new, village-level, voluntary health workers trained to serve as 
health sector‟s links in the rural areas. 

Sub-centres have been established for every 5,000 population (3,000 in hilly, 
tribal and backward areas) and are manned by a female health worker, also 
called the Auxiliary Nurse Mid-wife (ANM) and a male health worker. 

Primary Health Centres which are referral units for about six sub-centres have 
been established for every 30,000 population (20,000 in hilly, tribal and 
backward areas). All PHCs provide outpatient services, and the majority also 
have four to six in-patient beds. Their staff comprises of one medical officer 
and 14 para-medical workers (which includes a male and a female health 
assistant, a nurse-midwife, a laboratory technician, a pharmacist and other 
supporting staff). 

Community Health Centres are the first referral units for four PHCs and also 
provides specialist care. According to the norms each CHC (for every 1 lakh 
population) should have at least 30 beds, one operation theatre, X-ray machine, 
labour room and laboratory facilities and should be staffed by at least four 
specialists i.e. a surgeon, a physician, a gynaecologist and a paediatrician 
supported by 21 para-medical and other staff.
313 

Rural hospitals have also been set up and these includes the sub-district 
hospitals called as the sub-divisional / Taluk hospitals / specialty hospitals 
(estimated to be about 2000 in the country); 

Speciality and teaching hospitals are fewer and these include the medical 
colleges (about 300 in number presently) and other tertiary referral centres. 
These are mostly in district towns and urban areas but some of them provide 
very specialized and advanced medical services. 

Other agencies belonging to the government, such as hospitals and dispensaries 
of railways, defence and similar large departments (Ports/ Mines etc.) also play 
a role in providing health services. However, their services are often restricted 
to the employees of the concerned organizations and their dependents. 

2. Private sector providers 

India has a very large private health sector providing all three types of 
healthcare services - primary, secondary as well as tertiary. These range from 
voluntary, not-for-profit organisations and individuals to for-profit corporate, 
trusts, 
solo 
practitioners, 
stand-alone 
specialist 
services, 
diagnostic 
laboratories, pharmacy shops, and also the unqualified providers (quacks). In 
India nearly 77% of the allopathic (MBBS and above) doctors are practicing in the 
private sector. Private health expenditure accounts for more than 75% of all 
health spending in India. The private sector accounts for 82% of all outpatient 
visits and 52% of hospitalization at the all India level2. 

India also has the largest number of qualified practitioners in other systems of 
Medicine (Ayurveda/ Siddha/ Unani/ Homeopathy) which is over 7 lakh 
practitioners. These are located in the public as well as the private sector. 

Apart from the for-profit private providers of health care, the NGOs and the 
voluntary sector have also been engaged in providing health care services to the 
community. 

It is estimated that more than 7,000 voluntary agencies are involved in health-
related activities. A large number of secondary and tertiary hospitals are also 
registered as non-profit societies or trusts, and contribute significantly to 
provision of inpatient services to insured persons. 

3. Pharmaceutical industry 

Coming to provider of medicines and health related products, India has a large 
pharmaceutical industry, which has grown from a Rs 10 crore industry in 1950 to 
a Rs 55,000 crore business today (including exports). It employs about 5 million 
people, with manufacturing taking place in over 6000 units. 
The central level price regulator for the industry is the National 
Pharmaceuticals Pricing Authority (NPPA), while the pharma sector is under
314 
the Ministry of Chemicals. Only a small number of drugs (76 out of the 500 or so 
bulk drugs) are under price control, while the remaining drugs and manufacture 
are under the free-pricing regime, carefully watched by the price regulator. 
The Drug Controllers of the States manage the field force which oversees 
quality and pricing of drugs and formulations in their respective areas. 

B. INSURANCE PROVIDERS: 

Insurance Companies especially in the general insurance sector provide the 
bulk of the health insurance services. These have been listed earlier. What is 
most encouraging is the presence of stand-alone health insurance companies - 
five as on date - with likelihood of a few more coming in to increase the health 
insurance provider network. 

C. INTERMEDIARIES: 

A number of people and organizations providing services as part of the 
insurance industry also form part of the health insurance market. All such 
intermediaries are governed by IRDA. These include: 

1. Insurance Brokers who may be individuals or corporates and work 
independently of insurance companies. They represent the people who 
want insurance and connect them to insurance companies obtaining best 
possible insurance covers at best possible premium rates. They also assist 
the insuring people during times of loss and making insurance claims. 
Brokers may place insurance business with any insurance company handling 
such business. They are remunerated by insurance companies by way of 
insurance commission.