Washington became the first state to ban the practice of texting with a cellphone while driving. 

Congress passes legislation extending the Terrorism Risk Insurance Act through the end of 2014. 
2008 
The Federal Reserve Bank acquired a 79 percent stake in American International Group (AIG) in 
exchange for an $85 billion loan, which was subsequently increased and restructured.

Troubled Asset Relief Program established to stabilize the financial sector. Insurers that own a 
federally regulated bank or thrift were eligible to participate.
2010 
Congress enacted an overhaul of the nation’s health care system, expanding access to medical 
insurance.
I.I.I. Insurance Handbook www.iii.org/insurancehandbook 193
I.I.I. 
Resources
I.I.I. Store
The I.I.I. Store is your gateway to a wide array of books and brochures from the Insurance 
Information Institute. Print and PDF formats, and quantity discounts are available 
for most products. Order online at www.iii.org/publications, call 212-346-5500 or email 
publications@iii.org.
I.I.I. INSURANCE FACT BOOK
Thousands of insurance facts, figures, tables and graphs designed for quick and easy reference.
THE FINANCIAL SERVICES FACT BOOK
Banking, securities and insurance industry trends and statistics. Published jointly with the 
Financial Services Roundtable. Online version available at www.financialservicesfacts.org
INSURANCE HANDBOOK
A guide to the insurance industry for reporters, public policymakers, students, insurance company 
employees, regulators and others. Provides concise explanations of auto, home, life, disability and 
business insurance, as well as issues papers, a glossary and directories. Online version available at 
www.iii.org/insurancehandbook
INSURING YOUR BUSINESS: 
A SMALL BUSINESSOWNERS’ GUIDE TO INSURANCE
A comprehensive insurance guide for small business owners. Special discounts available to 
organizations and agents for bulk orders. Online version available at www.iii.org/smallbusiness
A FIRM FOUNDATION: HOW INSURANCE SUPPORTS THE ECONOMY
Shows the myriad ways in which insurance provides economic support—from offering 
employment and fueling the capital markets, to providing financial security and income to 
individuals and businesses. Provides national and state data. Selected state versions are also 
available. Online version available at www.iii.org/economics
INTERNATIONAL INSURANCE FACT BOOK
Facts and statistics on the property/casualty and life insurance industries of dozens of countries. 
No print edition. Available in CD-ROM format. Online version available at www.iii.org/international
194 	I.I.I. Insurance Handbook www.iii.org/insurancehandbook 
I.I.l. Resources
COMMERCIAL INSURANCE
A comprehensive guide to the commercial insurance market—what it does, how it functions, and 
its key players. No print edition. Online version available at www.iii.org/commerciallines
I.I.I. INSURANCE DAILY
Keeps thousands of readers up-to-date on important events, issues and trends in the insurance 
industry each business morning. Transmitted early each business day via email.
KNOW YOUR STUFF
Free online home inventory software. Available in the store and at www.knowyourstuff.org
INSURANCE MATTERS 
A guide to the insurance industry for policymakers. Available at www.iii-insurancematters.org
CONSUMER BROCHURES
Renters Insurance — All renters need to know about insurance 
Am I Covered? — A guide to homeowners insurance 
Your Home Inventory — Instructions on how to prepare an inventory of possessions to help 
identify and calculate losses if a disaster strikes 
Nine Ways to Lower Your Auto Insurance Costs — Tips on how to lower your auto insurance 
costs 
Settling Insurance Claims After a Disaster — Helps you understand how to file an insurance 
claim after a disaster 
Twelve Ways to Lower Your Homeowners Insurance Costs — Tips on how to lower your 
homeowners insurance costs
...and many others
I.I.I. on the Web
Visit www.iii.org for a wealth of information for individuals and business, from consumer 
brochures to issues papers to white papers to statistics.
•	
Become an I.I.I. fan on Facebook at www.facebook.com/InsuranceInformationInstitute
•	
Read about the industry in Claire Wilkinson’s blog, Terms and Conditions, at 
www.iii.org/insuranceindustryblog
•	
Follow the I.I.I. website on Twitter at http://twitter.com/iii.org and on its special interest feeds:
http://www.iii.org/insuranceindustryblog/ —