Answer 5 

The correct option is IV. 

In the insurance context „risk retention‟ indicates a situation where one decides 
to bear the risk and its effects. 

Answer 6 

The correct option is IV. 

Insurance pays when there is loss of asset. 

Answer 7 

The correct option is II. 

Rs. 200 per household should cover the loss. 

Answer 8 

The correct option is I. 

Insurance is a method of sharing the losses of a „few‟ by „many‟. 

Answer 9 

The correct option is I. 

Before acceptance of a risk, insurers arrange survey and inspection of the 
property to assess the risk for rating purposes.
26 

Answer 10 

The correct option is II. 

Insurance may be considered as a process by which the losses of a few, who are 
unfortunate to suffer such losses, are shared amongst those exposed to similar 
uncertain events / situations.
27 
CHAPTER 2 

CUSTOMER SERVICE 
Chapter Introduction 

In this chapter you will learn the importance of customer service. You will learn 
the role of agents in providing service to customers. You will learn different 
grievances redressal mechanisms available for Insurance policyholders. You will 
also learn how to communicate and relate with customer. 

Learning Outcomes 

A. Customer service – General concepts 
B. Insurance agent‟s role in providing great customer service 
C. Grievance redressal 
D. Communication process 
E. Non-verbal communication 
F. Ethical behaviour 

After studying this chapter, you should be able to: 

1. Illustrate the importance of customer services 
2. Describe quality of service 
3. Examine importance of service in the insurance industry 
4. Discuss the role of an insurance agent in providing good service 
5. Review grievance redressal mechanism in insurance 
6. Explain the process of communication 
7. Demonstrate the importance of non-verbal communication 
8. Recommend ethical behaviour
28 

A. Customer service – General concepts 

1. Why Customer Service? 

Customers provide the bread and butter of a business and no enterprise can 
afford to treat them indifferently. The role of customer service and 
relationships is far more critical in the case of insurance than in other products. 

This is because insurance is a service and very different from real goods. 

Let us examine how buying insurance differs from purchasing a car. 

A Car 
Insurance of the car 
It is a tangible good, that can 
be 
seen, 
test 
driven 
and 
experienced. 
It is a contract to compensate against loss or 
damage to the car due to an unforeseen 
accident in future. One cannot see or touch 
or experience the insurance benefit till the 
unfortunate event occurs. 
The buyer of the car has an 
expectation of some pleasure 
at the time of purchase. The 
experience is real and easy to 
understand. 

The purchase of insurance is not based on 
expectation of immediate pleasure, but 
fear/anxiety about a possible tragedy. 
It is unlikely that any insurance customer 
would look forward to a situation where the 
benefit becomes payable. 
A car is produced in a factory 
assembly 
line, 
sold 
in 
a 
showroom and used on the 
road. 
The three processes of making, 
selling and using take place at 
three 
different 
times 
and 
places. 
In case of insurance it can be seen that 
production 
and 
consumption 
happen 
simultaneously. 
This 
simultaneity 
of 
production and consumption is a distinctive 
feature of all services. 

What the customer really derives is a service experience. If this is less than 
satisfactory, it causes dissatisfaction. If the service exceeds expectations, the 
customer would be delighted. The goal of every enterprise should thus be to 
delight its customers. 

2. Quality of service 

It is necessary for insurance companies and their personnel, which includes their 
agents, to render high quality service and delight the customer. 

But what is high quality service? What are its attributes? 

A well-known model on service quality [named “SERVQUAL‟] would give us 
some insights. It highlights five major indicators of service quality:
29 
a) Reliability: the ability to perform the promised service dependably and 
accurately. Most customers regard reliability as being the most 
important of the five dimensions of service quality. It is the foundation 
on which trust is built. 

b) Responsiveness: refers to the willingness and ability of service 
personnel to help customers and provide prompt response to the 
customer‟s needs. It may be measured by indicators like speed, 
accuracy, and attitude while giving the service. 

c) Assurance: refers to the knowledge, competence and courtesy of service 
providers and their ability to convey trust and confidence. It is given by 
the customer‟s evaluation of how well the service employee has 
understood needs and is capable of meeting them. 

d) Empathy: is described as the human touch. It is reflected in the caring 
attitude and individualised attention provided to customers. 

e) Tangibles: represent the physical environmental factors that the 
customer can see, hear and touch. For instance the location, the layout 
and cleanliness and the sense of order and professionalism that one gets 
when visiting an insurance company‟s office can make a great impression 
on the customer. The physical ambience becomes especially important 
because it creates first and lasting impressions, before and after the 
actual service is experienced. 

3. Customer service and insurance 

Ask any leading sales producers in the insurance industry about how they 
managed to reach the top and stay there. You are likely to get a common 
answer, that it was the patronage and support of their existing clients that 
helped them build their business. 

You would also learn that a large part of their income comes from the 
commissions for renewal of the contracts. Their clients are also the source for 
acquiring new customers. 

What is the secret of their success? 

The answer, most likely is, commitment to serving their customers. 

How does keeping a customer happy benefit the agent and the company? 

To answer this question, it would be useful to look at customer‟s lifetime value. 

Customer lifetime value may be defined as the sum of economic benefits that 
can be derived from building a sound relationship with a customer over a long 
period of time. 
Diagram 1: Customer Lifetime Value
30 

An agent who renders service and builds close relationships with her customers, 
builds goodwill and brand value, which helps in expanding the business. 

Test Yourself 1 

What is meant by customer lifetime value? 

I. Sum of costs incurred while servicing the customer over his lifetime 
II. Rank given to customer based on business generated 
III. Sum of economic benefits that can be achieved by building a long term 
relationship with the customer 
IV. Maximum insurance that can be attributed to the customer
31 

B. Insurance agent‘s role in providing great customer service 

Let us now consider how an agent can render great service to the customer. The 
role begins at the stage of sale and continues through the duration of the 
contract, and includes the following steps. Let us look at some of the 
milestones in a contract and the role played at each step. 

1. The Point of Sale - Best advice 

The first point for service is the point of sale. One of the critical issues involved 
in purchase of non-life Insurance is to determine the amount of coverage [Sum 
Insured] to be bought. 

Here it is important to keep a basic percept in mind - Do not recommend 
insuring where the risk can be managed otherwise. The insured needs to make 
sure that the expected loss involved is greater than the cost of insurance. 
If the premium payments are high compared to the loss involved, it may be 
advisable to just bear the risk. 

On the other hand, if the occurrence of any contingency would lead to financial 
burden, it is wise to insure against such contingency. 

Whether insurance is needed or not, depends on the circumstances. If the 
probability of loss or damage to an asset due to a peril is negligible, one may 
retain the risk rather than insure it. Similarly if an item has insignificant value, 
one may not insure it. 

Example 

To a homeowner living in a flood prone area, purchasing cover against floods 
would prove to be helpful. 

On the other hand, if the home owner owns a home at a place where the risk of 
floods is negligible it may not be necessary to obtain cover. 

In India, motor insurance against third party is compulsory under the law. In 
that case, the debate about whether one needs insurance or not is irrelevant. 

One must purchase third party insurance if he owns a vehicle because it is 
mandatory if one wants to drive on a public road. At the same time it would be 
prudent to cover the possibility of loss of own damage to the car which is not 
mandatory. 

In case a portion of the possible loss can be borne by oneself, it would be 
economical for the insured to opt for a deductible. A corporate customer may 
have varied needs, right from the coverage of factory, people, cars, liability 
exposures etc. She needs the right advice for the coverage and policies to be 
taken. 
Most non-life insurance policies broadly fall in two categories:
32 

 Named peril policies 
 All risk policies 

The latter are costlier as they cover all losses which are specifically not 
excluded under the policy. Hence opting for „named peril‟ policies where the 
most probable causes of loss are covered by the perils named in the policy may 
be more beneficial, as such a step could save premiums and provide need based 
cover to the insured. 

The agent really begins to earn her commission when she renders best advice on 
the matter. It would be worthwhile for the agent to remember that while one 
may view insurance as the standard approach for dealing with the risk, there 
are other techniques like risk retention or loss prevention that are available as 
options for reducing the cost of insurance. 

From the standpoint of an insured the relevant questions for instance may be: 

 How much premium will be saved by considering deductibles? 
 How much would a loss prevention activity result in reduction in 
premiums? 

When approaching the customer as a non-life insurance sales person the 
question an agent needs to ask herself is about her role vis-à-vis the customer. 
Is she going there just to get a sale or to relate to the customer as a coach and 
partner who would help him to manage his risks more effectively? 

The customer‟s angle is different. He is not so much concerned with getting 
maximum insurance per rupee spent, but rather in reducing the cost of 
handling risk. The concern would be thus on identifying those risks which 
customer cannot retain and hence must be insured. 

In other words the role of an insurance agent is more than that of a mere sales 
person. She also needs to be a risk assessor, underwriter, risk management 
counsellor, designer of customised solutions and a relationship builder who 
thrives on building trust and long-term relationships, all rolled into one. 

2. The proposal stage 

The agent has to support the customer in filling out the proposal for insurance. 
The insured is required to take responsibility for the statements made therein. 
The salient aspects of a proposal form have been discussed in chapter 5. 

It is very important that the agent should explain and clarify to proposer the 
details to be filled as answer to each of questions in the proposal form. In the 
event of a claim, a failure to give proper and complete information can 
jeopardise the customer‟s claim. 
Sometimes there may be additional information that may be required to 
complete the policy. In such cases the company may inform the customer 
directly or through the agent / advisor. In either case, it becomes necessary to
33 
help the customer complete all the required formalities and even explain to him 
or her why these are necessary. 

In View of Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority of India (I.R.D.A.I.) 
(Issuance of e-Insurance Policies) Regulations, 2016, which have come into 
Force, from 1st October, 2016: 
“Every Insurer, soliciting Insurance-Business through Electronic-Mode, shall 
create an e-Proposal-Form, Similar to the Physical Proposal-Form, Approved by 
the Authority; and such Form should enable Capture-of-Information in 
Electronic-Form, that would enable Easy Processing and Servicing.” 

“e-Proposal-Form shall have a Provision to Capture the electronic-Insurance-
Account (e-I-A) Number of the Prospect, and the Insurer shall facilitate its 
Creation, whenever the electronic-Insurance-Policy is proposed to be issued 
through the Insurance Repository System.” 

 “The Prospect should have Own electronic-Signature, while furnishing the 
Details in e-Proposal-Form.” 
Here, the Agent can help the Customer to open an e-Insurance Account (e-I-A), 
if required, through the Registered Insurance Repository. 

3. Acceptance stage 

a) Cover note 

The cover note has been discussed in chapter „5‟. It is the agent‟s 
responsibility to ensure that the cover note is issued by the company, where 
applicable, to the insured. Promptness in this regard communicates to the 
client that his interests are safe in the hands of the agent and the company. 

b) Delivery of the policy document 

Delivery of the policy is another major opportunity that an agent gets to 
make contact with the customer. If company rules permit a policy document 
being delivered in person, it may be a good idea to collect it and present 
the document to the customer. 

If the policy is being sent directly by mail, one must contact the customer, 
once it is known that the policy document has been sent. This is an 
opportunity to visit the customer and explain anything that is unclear in 
the document received. This is also an occasion to clarify various kinds of 
policy provisions, and the policy holder‟s rights and privileges that the 
customer can avail of. This act demonstrates a willingness to provide a level 
of service beyond the sale.
34 
This meeting is also an occasion to pledge the agent‟s commitment to 
serving the customer and communicating full support. 

In View of Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority of India (I.R.D.A.I.) 
(Issuance of e-Insurance Policies) Regulations, 2016, which have come into 
Force, from 1st October, 2016: 

“Every Insurer shall issue Electronic Insurance-Policies, in Case of: All Motor 
Retail Insurance and Individual Travel (Over-Seas) Insurance, and the Policies 
that fulfil the Criteria, in Terms of Sum-Assured {Rupees 10 Lakhs in Case of 
Pure Term-Assurance [excluding, Term-Assurance with Return-of-Premium(s)] 
and All Retail General Insurance except Motor Insurance, and Individual 
Personal Accident (P.A.) Insurance and Domestic Travel Insurance, and Rupees 
1 Lakh in Case of Other Than Pure Term-Assurance [including, Term-Assurance 
with Return-of-Premium(s)], and Rupees 5 Lakhs in Case of Individual Health-
Insurance} or Premium {Single or Annual, Equal To or Exceeding Rupees 
10,000/- [Rupees 5,000/- in Case of All Retail General Insurance Policies 
except Motor Insurance]}, or, Pension-Per-Annum {Rupees 10,000/- in Case of 
Immediate Annuities}.” 

Here, the Agent can help the Customer to open an e-Insurance Account (e-I-A), 
through the Registered Insurance Repository. 

The next logical step would be to ask for the names and particulars of other 
individuals he knows who can possibly benefit from the agent‟s services. If 
the client can himself contact these people and introduce the agent to 
them, it would mean a great breakthrough in business. 

c) Policy renewal 

Non-life insurance policies have to be renewed each year and the customer 
has a choice at the time of each renewal, to continue insuring with the same 
company or switch to another company. This is a critical point where the 
goodwill and trust created by the agent and the company gets tested. 

Although there is no legal obligation on the part of insurers to advise the 
insured that his policy is due to expire on a particular date, yet as a matter 
of courtesy and decidedly a healthy business practice, insurers issue a 
―Renewal Notice‖ one month in advance of the date of expiry, inviting 
renewal of the policy. The agent needs to be in touch with the customer 
well before the renewal due date to remind the latter about renewal so that 
he can make provision for the same.
35 
The relationship gets strengthened by keeping in touch with the client from 
time to time, by greeting him on some occasion like a festival or a family 
event. Similarly when there is a moment of difficulty or sorrow by to 
offering assistance. 

4. The claim stage 

The agent has a crucial role to play at the time of claim settlement. It is her 
task to ensure that the incident giving rise to the claim is immediately informed 
to the insurer and that the customer carefully follows all the formalities and 
assists in all the investigations that may need to be done to assess the loss. 

Test Yourself 2 

Identify the scenario where a debate on the need for insurance is not required. 

I. Property insurance 
II. Business liability insurance 
III. Motor insurance for third party liability 
IV. Fire insurance
36 

C. Grievance redressal 

1. Overview 

The time for high priority action is when the customer has a complaint. 
Remember that in the case of a complaint, the issue of service failure [it can 
range from delay in correcting the records of the insurer to a lack of 
promptness in settling a claim] which has aggrieved the customer is only a part 
of the story. 

Customers get upset and infuriated a lot more because of their interpretations 
about such failure. There are two types of feelings and related emotions that 
arise with each service failure: 

 Firstly there is a sense of unfairness, a feeling of being cheated 
 The second feeling is one of hurt ego – of being made to look and feel 
small 

A complaint is a crucial “moment of truth” in the customer relationship; if the 
company gets it right there is potential to actually improve customer loyalty. 
The human touch is critical in this; customers want to feel valued. 

If you are a professional insurance advisor, you would not allow such a situation 
to happen in the first place. You would take the matter up with the appropriate 
officer of the company. Remember, no one else in the company has 
ownership of the client‘s problems as much as you do. 

Complaints / grievances provide us the opportunity to demonstrate how much 
we care for the customer‟s interests. They are in fact the solid pillars on which 
an insurance agent‟s goodwill and business is built. At the end of every policy 
document, the insurance companies have detailed the procedure of grievance 
redressal, which should be brought to the notice of the customers at the time of 
explaining the document provisions. 

Word of mouth publicity (Good/Bad) has significant role in selling and 
servicing. Remember good service gets rewarded by 5 people being informed, 
where 
as 
bad 
service 
is 
passed 
on 
to 
20 
people. 

The regulator provides that any grievance of a policy holder should be first 
referred to the insurer‟s Grievance Cell. If no response/resolution or 
unsatisfactory resolution is provided, then the complainant may approach the 
Regulator through the Integrated Grievance Management System mentioned 
below. 

2. Integrated Grievance Management System (IGMS) 

IRDA has launched an Integrated Grievance Management System (IGMS) which 
acts as a central repository of insurance grievance data and as a tool for 
monitoring grievance redress in the industry.
37 

Policyholders can register on this system with their policy details and lodge 
their complaints. Complaints are then forwarded to respective insurance 
company. IGMS tracks complaints and the time taken for redressal. The 
complaints can be registered at: 
http://www.policyholder.gov.in/Integrated_Grievance_Management.aspx 
3. The Consumer Protection Act, 1986 

This Act was passed “to provide for better protection of the interest of 
consumers and to make provision for the establishment of consumer councils 
and other authorities for the settlement of consumer’s disputes.” The Act has 
been amended by the Consumer Protection (Amendment) Act, 2002. 

a) Definitions under the Act 

Some definitions provided in the Act are as follows: 

Definition 

―Service‖ means service of any description which is made available to potential 
users and includes the provision of facilities in connection with banking, 
financing, insurance, transport, processing, supply of electrical or other energy, 
board or lodging or both, housing construction, entertainment, amusement or 
the purveying of news or other information. But it does not include the 
rendering of any service free of charge or under a contract of personal service. 

Insurance is included as a service 

“Consumer” means any person who: 

i. Buys any goods for a consideration and includes any user of such goods. 
But does not include a person who obtains such goods for resale or for 
any commercial purpose or 
ii. Hires or avails of any services for a consideration and includes 
beneficiary of such services. 

'Defect' means any fault, imperfection, shortcoming inadequacy in the quality, 
nature and manner of performance which is required to be maintained by or 
under any law or has been undertaken to be performed by a person in 
pursuance of a contract or otherwise in relation to any service. 

'Complaint' means any allegation in writing made by a complainant that: 

i. An unfair trade practice or restrictive trade practice has been adopted 
ii. The goods bought by him suffer from one or more defects 
iii. The services hired or availed of by him suffer from deficiency in any 
respect 
iv. Price charged is in excess of that fixed by law or displayed on package 
Goods which will be hazardous to life and safety when used are being 
offered for sale to the public in contravention of the provisions of any law 
requiring trader to display information in regard to the contents, manner
38 
and effect of use of such goods 

'Consumer dispute' means a dispute where the person against whom a 
complaint has been made, denies and disputes the allegations contained in the 
complaint. 

b) Consumer disputes redressal agencies 

Consumer disputes redressal agencies are established in each district and 
state and at national level. 

i. District Forum: The forum has jurisdiction to entertain complaints, 
where value of the goods or services and the compensation claimed is up 
to Rs. 20 lakhs The District Forum is empowered to send its order/decree 
for execution to appropriate Civil Court. 

ii. State Commission: This redressal authority has original, appellate and 
supervisory jurisdiction. It entertains appeals from the District Forum. It 
also has original jurisdiction to entertain complaints where the value of 
goods/service and compensation, if any claimed exceeds Rs. 20 lakhs but 
does not exceed Rs. 100 lakhs. Other powers and authority are similar to 
those of the District Forum. 

iii. National Commission: The final authority established under the Act is 
the National Commission. It has original; appellate as well as supervisory 
jurisdiction. It can hear the appeals from the order passed by the State 
Commission and in its original jurisdiction it will entertain disputes, 
where goods/services and the compensation claimed exceeds Rs.100 
lakhs. It has supervisory jurisdiction over State Commission. 

All the three agencies have powers of a Civil Court. 

c) Procedure for filing a complaint 

The procedure for filing a complaint for the three redressal agencies 
mentioned above is very simple. There is no fee for filing a complaint or 
filing an appeal whether before the State Commission or National 
Commission. 

The complaint can be filed by the complainant himself or by his authorised 
agent. It can be filed personally or can even be sent by post. It may be 
noted that no advocate is necessary for the purpose of filing a complaint. 

d) Consumer Forum orders 

If the forum is satisfied that the goods complained against suffer from any of 
the defects specified in the complaint or that any of the allegations 
contained in the complaint about the services are proved, the forum can
39 
issue an order directing the opposite party to do one or more of the 
following namely, 

i. To return to the complainant the price, [or premium in case of 
insurance], the charges paid by the complainant 
ii. To award such amount as compensation to the consumers for any loss or 
injury suffered by the consumer due to negligence of the opposite party 
iii. To remove the defects or deficiencies in the services in question 
iv. To discontinue the unfair trade practice or the restrictive trade 
practice or not to repeat them 
v. To provide for adequate costs to parties 

e) Consumer disputes categories 

The majority of consumer disputes with the three forums fall in the 
following main categories, as far as the insurance business is concerned: 

i. Delay in settlement of claims 
ii. Non-settlement of claims 
iii. Repudiation of claims 
iv. Quantum of loss 
v. Policy terms, conditions etc 

4. The Insurance Ombudsman 

The Central Government under the powers of the Insurance Act 1938 and 
Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority Act 1999(41 of 1999), made 
Insurance Ombudsman Rules 2017 by a notification published in the official 
gazette on 25th April,2017. These rules apply to all insurers and their agents 
and intermediaries in respect of complaints of all personal lines of insurances, 
that is, insurances taken in an individual capacity. 

The objective of these rules is to resolve all complaints of all personal lines of 
insurance, group insurance policies, policies issued to sole proprietorship and 
micro enterprises on the part of insurance companies and their agents and 
intermediaries in a cost effective, and impartial manner 

The Ombudsman, by mutual agreement of the insured and the insurer can 
act as a mediator and counsellor within the terms of reference. 

The decision of the Ombudsman, whether to accept or reject the complaint, 
is final. 

a) Complaint to the Ombudsman 

Any complaint made to the Ombudsman should be in writing, signed by the 
insured or his legal heirs, nominee or assignee addressed to an Ombudsman 
within whose jurisdiction, the insurer has a branch / office, the facts giving 
rise to the complaint supported by documents, the nature and extent of 
loss caused to the complainant and the relief sought.
40 

Complaints can be made to the Ombudsman if: 

i. The complainant had made a previous written representation to the 
insurance company and the insurance company had: 

 Rejected the complaint or 
 The complainant had not received any reply within one month after 
receipt of the complaint by the insurer 
 The complainant is not satisfied with the reply given by the insurer. 

ii. The complaint is made within one year from the date of rejection by the 
insurance company. 

iii. The complaint is not pending in any Court or Consumer Forum or in 
arbitration. 

b) Recommendations by the Ombudsman 

There are certain duties/protocols that the Ombudsman is expected to 
follow: 

i. Recommendations should be made within one month of the receipt of 
such a complaint 
ii. The copies should be sent to both the complainant and the insurance 
company 
iii. Recommendations have to be accepted in writing by the complainant 
within 15 days of receipt of such recommendation 
iv. A copy of acceptance letter by the insured should be sent to the insurer 
and his written confirmation sought within 15 days of his receiving such 
acceptance letter 

If the dispute is not settled by intermediation, the Ombudsman will pass 
award based on the pleadings and evidence brought on record. It shall be in 
writing and state the reasons upon which the award is based. 

c) Awards by Ombudsman 

The awards by Ombudsman are governed by the following rules: 
i. The award should not be in excess of the loss suffered by the 
complainant or should not be more than Rs. 30 lakh (including relevant 
expenses, if any). 
ii. The award should be made within a period of 3 months from the date of 
receipt of all requirements from the complainant and a copy of the 
award should be sent to the complainant and the insurer. 
iii. The insurer shall comply with the award within 30 days of the receipt of 
the award and intimate compliance o The complainant shall be entitled 
to such interest at a rate per annum as specified in the regulations 
framed under the IRDA Act !999 from the date the claim ought to have 
been settled under regulations, till the date of payment of the award. 
The award is binding on insurers.
41 

Test Yourself 3 

As per the Consumer Protection Act, 1986, who cannot be classified as a 
consumer? 

I. Hires goods / services for personal use 
II. A person who buys goods for resale purpose 
III. Buys goods and services for a consideration and uses them 
IV. Uses the services of another for a consideration
42 

D. Communication process 

Communication skills in customer service 

One of the most important set of skills that an agent or service employee needs 
to possess, for effective performance in the work place, is soft skills. 

Unlike hard skills – which deal with an individual‟s ability to perform a certain 
type of task or activity, soft skills relate to one‘s ability to interact effectively 
with 
other 
workers 
and 
customers, 
both 
at 
work 
and 
outside. 
Communication skills are one of the most important of these soft skills. 

1. Communication and customer relationships 

Customer service is one of the key elements in creating satisfied and loyal 
customers. But it is not enough. Customers are human beings with whom the 
company needs to build a strong relationship. 
It is both the service and the relationship experience that ultimately shapes 
how the customer would look at the company. 

What goes to make a healthy relationship? 

At its heart, of course, there is trust. At the same time there are other 
elements, which reinforce and promote that trust. Let us illustrate some of the 
elements 

Diagram 2: Elements for Trust 

i. Every relationship begins with attraction: 

One needs to be simply liked and must be able to build a rapport with the 
customer. Attraction is very often the result of first impressions that are 
derived when a customer comes in touch with the organisation or its 
representatives. Attraction is the first key to unlocking every heart. 
Without it a relationship is hardly possible. Consider a sales person who is 
not liked. Do you really think she will be able to make much headway in the 
sales career? 

ii. The second element of a relationship is one‟s presence – being there 
when needed:
43 

The best example is perhaps that of a marriage. Is it important for the 
husband to be available when the wife needs him? Similarly in a customer 
relationship, the issue is whether and how the company or its 
representative is available when needed. Is she or he fully present and 
listening to the customer‘s needs? 

There may be instances when one is not fully present and do justice to all the 
expectations of one‟s customers. One can still maintain a strong relationship if 
one can speak to the customer, in a manner that is assuring, full of empathy 
and conveys a sense of responsibility. 

All of the above points like: 

 The impression one creates or 
 The way one is present and listens or 
 The message one sends across to another 

are dimensions of communication and call for discipline and skills. In a sense 
what one communicates is ultimately a function of how one thinks and sees. 

The companies emphasise a lot on customer relationship management as the 
cost of retaining a customer is far lower than acquiring a new customer. The 
customer relation occurs across many touch points e.g. while understanding 
customers insurance needs, explaining coverage‟s, handing over forms. So, 
there are many opportunities for the agent to strengthen the relation at each of 
these points. 

2. Process of communication 

What is communication? 

All communications require a sender, who transmits a message, and a recipient 
of that message. The process is complete once the receiver has understood the 
message of the sender. 

Diagram 3: Forms of communication
44 
Communication may take place several forms 

 Oral 
 Written 
 Non-verbal 
 Using body language 

It may be face to face, over the phone, or by mail or internet. It may be formal 
or informal. Whatever the content or form of the message or the media used, 
the essence of communication is given by what the recipient has understood as 
being communicated. 

It is important for a business to choose how and when it will send messages to 
intended receivers. 

The communication process is illustrated below. 

Let us define the terms in the diagram: 

Diagram 4: Communication process 

Definition 

i. Source: As the source of the message, the agent must be clear about why 
she is communicating, and what she wants to communicate, and confident 
that the information being communicated is useful and accurate. 

ii. Message is the information that one wants to communicate. 

iii. Encoding is the process of transferring the information one wants to 
communicate into a form that can be sent and correctly decoded at the 
other end. Success in encoding depends on how well one is able to convey 
information and eliminate sources of confusion. For this it is necessary to 
know one‟s audience. Failure to do so can result in delivering messages that 
are misunderstood. 

iv. A Message is conveyed through a channel, which has to be selected for the 
purpose. The channel may be verbal including personal face-to-face
45 
meetings, telephone and videoconferencing; or it may be written including 
letters, emails, memos, and reports. 

v. Decoding is the step wherein the information gets received, interpreted and 
understood in a certain way, at its destination. It can be seen that decoding 
[or how one receives a message] is as important as encoding [how one 
conveys it]. 

vi. Receiver: Finally there is the receiver, the individual or individuals [the 
audience] to whom the message is sent. Each member of this audience has 
his own ideas, beliefs and feelings and these would influence how the 
message has been received and acted upon. The sender obviously needs to 
consider these factors when deciding what message to send. 

vii. Feedback: Even as the message is being sent and received, the receiver is 
likely to send feedback in the form of verbal and non-verbal messages to the 
sender. The latter needs to look for such feedback and carefully understand 
these reactions as it would help to determine how the message has been 
received and acted upon. If necessary the message could be changed or 
rephrased. 

3. Barriers to effective communication 

Barriers to effective communication can arise at each step in the above process. 
Communication can get distorted because of the impression created about the 
sender, or because the message has been poorly designed, or because too much 
or too little has been conveyed, or because the sender has not understood the 
receiver‟s culture. The challenge is to remove all these barriers. 

Test Yourself 4 

What does not go on to make a healthy relationship? 

I. Attraction 
II. Trust 
III. Communication 
IV. Scepticism
46 
E. Non-verbal communication 

Let us now look at some concepts that the agent needs to understand. 

Important 

Making a great first impression 

We have already seen that attraction is the first pillar of any relationship. You 
can hardly expect to get business from a customer who does not like you. In 
fact many individuals need just a quick glance, of maybe a few seconds, to 
judge and evaluate you when you meet for the first time. Their opinion about 
you gets based on your appearance, your body language, your mannerisms, and 
how you are dressed and speak. Remember that first impressions last for long. 
Some useful tips for making a good first impression are: 

i. Be on time always. Plan to arrive a few minutes early, allowing 
flexibility for all kinds of possible delays. 

ii. Present yourself appropriately. Your prospect, whom you are meeting 
for the first time, does not know you and your appearance is usually the 
first clue he or she has to go on. 

 Is your appearance helping to create the right first impression? 
 Is the way you dress appropriate for the meeting or occasion? 
 Is your grooming clean and tidy – with good haircut and shave, clean 
and tidy clothes, neat and tidy make up? 

iii. A warm, confident and winning smile puts you and your audience 
immediately at ease with one another. 

iv. Being open, confident and positive 

 Does your body language project confidence and self-assurance? 
 Do you stand tall, smile, make eye contact, greet with a firm 
handshake? 
 Do you remain positive even in the face of some criticism or when 
the meeting is not going as well as expected? 
v. Interest in the other person - The most important thing is about being 
genuinely interested in the other person. 

 Do you take some time to find out about the customer as a person? 
 Are you caring and attentive to what he or she says? 
 Are you totally present and available to your customer or is your 
mobile phone engaging you during half your interview?
47 
1. Body language 

Body language refers to movements, gestures, facial expressions. The way we 
talk, walk, sit and stand, all says something about us, and what is happening 
inside us. 

It is often said that people listen to only a small percentage of what is actually 
said. What we don‟t say speaks a lot more and a lot louder. Obviously, one 
needs to be very careful about one‟s body language. 

a) Confidence 

Here are a few tips about how to appear confident and self-assured, giving 
the impression of someone to be seriously listened to: 

 Posture – standing tall with shoulders held back. 
 Solid eye contact - with a "smiling" face 
 Purposeful and deliberate gestures 

b) Trust 

Quite often, a sales person‟s words fall on deaf ears because the audience 
does not trust her – her body language does not give the assurance that she 
is sincere about what she says. It is very important to be aware of some of 
the typical signs that may indicate when one is not honest and believable 
and be on guard against them as listed below: 

 Eyes maintaining little or no eye contact, or rapid eye movements 
 Hand or fingers are in front of one‟s mouth when speaking 
 One‟s body is physically turned away from the other 
 One‟s breathing rate increases 
 Complexion changes colour; red in face or neck area 
 Perspiration increases 
 Voice changes such as change in pitch, stammering, throat clearing 
 Speech – slow and clear with tone of voice kept moderate to low 

Some body movements that indicate defensiveness and non-receptivity 
include: 

 Hand/arm gestures are small and close to one „s body 
 Facial expressions are minimal 
 Body is physically turned away from you 
 Arms are crossed in front of body 
 Eyes maintain little contact, or are downcast 

If your customer expresses any of these, perhaps it is time you checked 
yourself and paid more attention to what is going on in the customer‘s mind.
48 
2. Listening skills 

The third set of communication skills that one needs to be aware about and 
cultivate are listening skills. These follow from a well-known principle of 
personal effectiveness – „first to understand before being understood‟. 

How well you listen has a major impact on your job effectiveness, and on the 
quality of your relationships with others. Let us look at some listening tips. 

a) Active listening: 

It is where we consciously try to hear not only the words but also, more 
importantly, try to understand the complete message being sent by another. 

Let us look at some of the elements of active listening. They are:- 

i. Paying attention 

We need to give the speaker our undivided attention, and acknowledge the 
message. Note, non-verbal communication also "speaks" loudly. Some 
aspects of paying attention are as follows: 

 Look at the speaker directly 
 Put aside distracting thoughts 
 Don't mentally prepare a rebuttal 
 Avoid all external distractions [for instance, keep your mobile on 
silent mode] 
 "Listen" to the speaker's body language 

ii. Demonstrating that you are listening: 

Use of body language plays an important role here. For instance one may: 

 Give an occasional nod and smile 
 Adopt a posture that is open and draws out the other to speak freely 
 Have small verbal comments like yes and uh huh. 

iii. Provide feedback: 

A lot of what we hear may get distorted by our personal filters, like the 
assumptions, judgments, and beliefs we carry. As a listener, we need to be 
aware of these filters and try to understand what really is being said.