e) Provider (say age 35 to 55): this is the age when children have grown 
into teenagers, and includes their crucial high school years and college. 
One is highly concerned about the high cost of education that is needed 
today to make the child technically and professionally qualified to face 
the challenges of life. For insrtance, consider the amount that needs to 
be set up to finance a medical course that runs for five years. In many 
Indian homes, the girls also get married by the time they have turned 
into adults. Provision for marriage and settlement of the girls is one of 
the most critical areas of concern for Indian families. Indeed, marriage 
and education of children is the number one motive for savings among 
most Indian families today. 

f) Empty Nester (age 55 to 65): the term empty nester implies that the 
offspring have flown away leaving the nest [the household] empty. This 
is the period when children have married and sometimes have migrated 
to other places for work, leaving the parents. Hopefully by this stage, 
one has liquidated one‟s liabilities [like housing loan and other 
mortgages] and has built up a fund for reirement. This is also the period 
when degenerative ailments like BP and Diabetes begin to manifest and 
plague one‟s life. Health care protection becomes paramount as thus 
the need for financial independence and security of income. 

g) Retirement – the twilight years (age 60 and beyond) : this is the age 
when one has retired from active work and now draws largely on one‟s 
savings to meet the needs of life. Focus here is on addressing living 
needs till the end of one‟s life and that of one‟s spouse. The critical 
concerns are with health issues, uncertainty about income and 
loneliness. This is also the period when one would seek to enhance 
quality of life and enjoy many of the things that one had dreamt of but 
could never achieve – like pursuing a hobby or going on a vacation or a 
pilgrimage. The issue – whether one could age gracefully or in 
deprivation would depend a great deal on whether one has made 
adequate provision for these years.
119 
As we can see above, the economic life cycle has three phases. 

Student Phase 
The first phase is the pre-job phase when one is typically a 
student. This is a preparatory stage for taking up 
responsibilities as a productive citizen. The priority is 
developing one‟s skillsets and enhancing one‟s human 
capital value. 
Working Phase 
The phase of work begins somewhere between the ages of 
18 to 25 or even earlier, and may last for 35 to 40 years. 
During this period, the individual comes to earn more than 
he consumes and thus begins to save and invest funds. 
Retirement Phase 
In the process he accumulates wealth and builds assets 
which would provide funds for various needs in the future 
including an income in later years, when one has retired 
and stopped working. 

3. Why does one need to save and purchase various financial assets? 

The reason is that each stage in an individual‟s life, when he or she performs a 
particular role, brings with it a number of needs for which funds have to be 
provided. 

Example 

When a person gets married and starts a family of his own, he may need to have 
his own house. As children grow older, funds are needed for their higher 
education. As an individual goes well past middle age, the concern is for having 
provision to meet health costs and post retirement savings so that one does not 
need to depend on one‟s children and become a burden. Living with 
independence and dignity becomes important. 

Savings may be considered as a composite of two decisions. 

i. Postponement of consumption: an allocation of resources between present 
and future consumption 
ii. Parting with liquidity (or ready purchasing power) in exchange for less 
liquid assets. For instance, purchase of a life insurance policy implies 
exchanging money for a contract which is less liquid. 

Financial planning includes both kinds of decisions. One needs to plan in order 
to save for the future and also must invest wisely in assets which are 
appropriate for meeting the various needs that will arise in future. 

To understand the needs and appropriate assets, it would be relevant to look 
more closely at the stages of one‟s life as are illustrated below
120 
Important 

Life Stages 

Childhood stage 
When one is a student or learner 
Young 
unmarried 
stage 
When one has begun to earn a livelihood but is single 
Young married stage 
When one has become a partner or spouse 
Married with young 
children stage 
When one has become a parent 
Married with older 
children stage 
When one has become a provider who has to take care 
of education and other needs of children who are 
growing older 
Post 
family/Pre-
retirement stage 
When the children may have become independent and 
left the house, just as birds leaving an empty nest 
behind 
Retirement stage 
When one passes through the twilight years of one‟s 
life. One could live with dignity if one has saved and 
made sufficient provisions for the needs that arise at 
this stage or one may be destitute and dependent on 
another‟s charity if one has not made such provision 

4. Individual needs 

If we look at the above life cycle, we would see that three types of needs can 
arise. These give rise to three types of financial products. 

a) Enabling future transactions 

The first set of needs arise from funds that are needed to meet a range 
of anticipated expenditures that are expected to arise at different 
stages of the life cycle. There are two types of such needs: 

i. Specific transaction needs: Linked to specific life events which 
require a commitment of resources. For instance making a provision 
for higher education / marriage of dependents; or purchase of a 
house or consumer durables 

ii. General transaction needs: Amounts set aside from current 
consumption without being earmarked for any specific purposes – 
these are popularly termed as „future provisions‟ 

b) Meeting contingencies 

Contingencies are unforeseen life events that may call for a large 
commitment of funds which are not met from current income and hence 
needing to be pre-funded. Some of these events, like death and disability or 
unemployment, lead to a loss of income. Others, like a fire, may result in a 
loss of wealth. Such needs may be addressed through insurance, if the
121 
probability of their occurrence is low but cost impact is high. Alternatively 
one may need to set aside a large amount of liquid assets as a reserve as 
provision for such contingencies. 

c) Wealth accumulation 

All savings and investments indeed lead to creation of some wealth. When 
we speak of the accumulation motive it refers to an individual‟s desire to 
invest primarily with the motive of taking advantage and reap benefits from 
favourable market opportunities. In other words savings and investments are 
primarily driven by a desire to accumulate wealth. 

This motive has also been termed as the speculative motive because an 
individual is willing to take some risks while investing, with a view to earn a 
higher return. Higher return is desired because it enables to multiply one‟s 
wealth or net worth more rapidly. Wealth is desired because it is linked with 
independence, enterprise, power and influence. 

5. Financial products 

Corresponding to the above sets of needs there are three types of products in 
the financial market: 

Transactional 
products 
Bank deposits and other savings instruments that 
enable one to have adequate purchasing power 
(liquidity) at the right time and quantum. 
Contingency products 
like insurance 
These provide protection against large losses 
that may be suffered in the event of sudden 
unforeseen events. 
Wealth accumulation 
products 
Shares and high yielding bonds or real estate are 
examples of such products. Here the investment 
is made with a view to committing money for 
making more money. 

An individual would typically have a mix of all of the above needs and thus may 
need to have all three types of products. In a nutshell one may say there is: 

i. A need to save – For cash requirements 
ii. A need to insure – Against uncertainties 
iii. A need to invest – For wealth creation 

6. Risk profile and investments 

It would also be seen that as an individual moves through various stages in the 
life cycle, from young earner towards middle ages and then towards the final 
years of one‟s work life, the risk profile, or the approach towards taking risks 
also undergoes a change. 

When one is young, one has a lot of years to look forward to and one may tend 
to be quite aggressive and willing to take risks in order to accumulate as much
122 
wealth as possible. As the years pass however, one may become more prudent 
and careful about investing, the purpose now being to secure and consolidate 
one‟s investments. 

Finally, as one nears retirement years, one may tend to be quite conservative. 
The focus is now to have a corpus from which one can spend in the post 
retirement years. One may also think about making bequests for one‟s children 
or gifting to charity etc. 

One‘s investment style also changes to keep pace with the risk profile. This 
is indicated below 

Diagram 3: Risk Profile and Investment Style 

Risk Profile 
Investment Style 

Test Yourself 1 

Which among the following would you recommend in order to seek protection 
against unforeseen events? 

I. Insurance 
II. Transactional products like bank FD‟s 
III. Shares 
IV. Debentures
123 

B. Role of financial planning 

1. Financial planning 

Financial planning is the process in which a client‟s current and future needs 
that may arise are carefully considered and evaluated and his individual risk 
profile and income are assessed, to chart out a road map for meeting various 
anticipated / unforeseen needs through recommending appropriate financial 
products. 

Elements of financial planning include: 

 Investing - allocating assets based on one‟s risk taking appetite, 
 Risk management, 
 Retirement planning, 
 Tax and estate planning, and 
 Financing one‟s needs 

To put it in a nutshell financial planning involves 360 degrees planning. 

Diagram 4: Elements of Financial Planning
124 

2. Role of Financial planning 

Financial planning is not a new discipline. It was practiced in simple form by our 
fore fathers. There were limited investment options then. A few decades ago 
equity investment was considered by a large majority to be akin to gambling. 
Savings were largely channelled in bank deposits, postal savings schemes and 
other fixed income instruments. The challenges facing our society and our 
customers are far different today. Some of them are: 

i. Disintegration of the joint family 

The joint family has given way to the nuclear family, consisting of father, 
mother and children. The typical head and earning member of the family 
has to bear the onus of responsibility for taking care of oneself and one‟s 
immediate family. This calls for a lot of proper planning and one could 
benefit from a certain amount of support from a professional financial 
planner. 

ii. Multiple investment choices 

We have a large number of investment instruments available today for 
wealth creation, each of these having varying degrees of risk and return. To 
ensure accomplishment of financial goals, one has to choose wisely and 
make the right investment decisions based on one‟s risk taking appetite. 
Financial planning can help with one‟s asset allocation. 

iii. Changing lifestyles 

Instant gratification seems to be the order of the day. Individuals want to 
have the latest mobile phones, cars, large homes, memberships of 
prestigious clubs, etc. To satisfy these desires they invariably end up with 
large borrowings. The result is that a large chunk of income goes towards 
paying off loans, reducing the scope to save. Financial planning is a means 
to bring awareness and self-discipline as well as to help plan one‟s 
expenditure so that one can cut down unnecessary expenses and succeed in 
both: maintaining present standard of living while upgrading it over time. 

iv. Inflation 

Inflation is a rise in the general level of prices of goods and services in an 
economy over a period of time. This leads to a fall in the value of money. As 
a result the purchasing power of one‟s hard earned money gets eroded. 
Inflation could play havoc during one‟s retirement period, when regular 
income from one‟s gainful occupation has dried out and the only source of 
income is from past savings. Financial planning can help to ensure that one 
is equipped to deal with inflation, especially in later years.
125 
v. Other contingencies and needs 

Financial planning is also the means to help individuals meet a number of 
other needs and challenges. For instance, there are unexpected expenses 
that crop up during medical emergencies or other contingencies that 
individuals may have to cope with. Similarly, individuals need to manage 
their tax liabilities prudently. 

Individuals also need to ensure that their estate consisting of their wealth 
and properties, smoothly pass on to their loved ones after their death. 
There are other needs like the need to do charity or meet certain social and 
religious obligations during one‟s lifetime and even thereafter. Financial 
planning is the means to achieve all this, 

3. When is the right time to start financial planning? 

Is it meant only for the wealthy? Indeed, planning should ideally start the 
moment you earn your first salary. There is no trigger as such that says when 
one should begin to plan. 

There is however an important principle that should guide us – the longer 
the time period of our investments, the more they will multiply. 

Hence it is never too early to start. One‟s investments would then get the 
maximum benefit of time. Again, planning is not only for the wealthy 
individuals. It‟s for everyone. To achieve one‟s financial goals, one must follow 
a disciplined approach, beginning with setting financial goals and embarking on 
dedicated savings in investment vehicles that best suit one‟s risk taking 
appetite. An unplanned, impulsive approach to financial planning is one of the 
prime causes of financial distress that affects individuals. 

Test Yourself 2 

When is the best time to start financial planning? 

I. Post retirement 
II. As soon as one gets his first salary 
III. After marriage 
IV. Only after one gets rich
126 

C. Financial planning - Types 

Let us now look at the various types of financial planning exercises that an 
individual may need to do. 

Diagram 5: Financial Planning Advisory Services 

Consider the various advisory services that may be provided. There are six such 
areas we shall take up 

 Cash planning 
 Investment planning 
 Insurance planning 
 Retirement planning 
 Estate planning 
 Tax planning 

1. Cash planning 

Managing cash flows has two purposes. 

i. Firstly one needs to manage income and expenditures flow including 
establishing and maintaining a reserve of liquid assets to meet 
unanticipated or emergency needs. 

ii. Secondly one needs to systematically create and maintain a surplus of 
cash for capital investment. 

The first step here is to prepare a budget and perform an analysis of current 
income and expenditure flows. For this, individuals must first prepare a set of 
reasonable goals and objectives for the future. This would help to determine 
whether current spending patterns would get them there. 

The next step is to analyse the expenses and income flows over last six 
months to see what regular and lump sum costs have been incurred. Expenses 
may be categorised into different types and also divided into fixed and variable
127 
expenses. While one may not have much control over the fixed expenses, the 
variable expenses being more discretionary, can often be reduced or postponed. 

The third step is to predict future monthly income and expenses over the 
whole year. On the basis of analysis of past and anticipation for the future, one 
can design a plan for managing these cash flows. 

Another part of the cash planning process is to design strategies for maximizing 
discretionary income. 

Example 

One can restructure one‟s outstanding debts. 

One can meet outstanding credit card debts through consolidating them and 
paying them off through a bank loan with lower interest. 

One may reallocate one‟s investments to make them earn more income. 

2. Insurance planning 

There are certain risks to which individuals are exposed that can keep them 
from attaining their personal financial goals. Insurance planning involves 
constructing a plan of action to provide adequate insurance against such risks. 

The task here is to estimate how much insurance is needed and determining 
what type of policy is best suited. 

i. Life insurance may be decided by estimating the income and expense 
requirements of the dependents in the event of premature death of the 
bread winner. 

ii. Health insurance requirements may be assessed in terms of the 
hospitalisation expenses that are likely to be incurred in any family 
medical emergency. 

iii. Finally insurance for one‘s assets may be considered in terms of the 
type and quantum of cover required to protect one‟s home/vehicle / 
factory etc. from the risk of loss. 

3. Investment planning 

There is no one right way to invest. What is appropriate would vary from 
individual to individual. Investment planning is a process of determining the 
most suitable investment and asset allocation strategies based on an 
individual‟s risk taking appetite, financial goals and the time horizon to meet 
those goals.
128 
a) Investment parameters 

Diagram 6: Investment Parameters 

The first step here is to define certain investment parameters. These include: 

i. Risk tolerance: A measure of how much risk someone is willing to take 
in purchasing an investment. 

ii. Time horizon: It is the amount of time available to attain a financial 
objective. The time horizon affects the investment vehicles used to 
attain the goal. The longer the time horizon, the less concern is there 
about short term liability. One can then invest in longer term, less liquid 
assets that earn a higher return. 

iii. Liquidity: Individuals whose capacity to invest is limited or whose 
income and expenditure flows are uncertain or who are investing for 
meeting a particular personal or business expenditure may be concerned 
with liquidity or the ability to convert investment into cash without loss 
of value. 

iv. Marketability: The ease with which an asset can be bought or sold. 

v. Diversification: The extent to which one seeks to diversify or spread the 
investments to reduce the risks.
129 
vi. Tax considerations: Many investments confer certain income tax 
benefits and one may like to consider the post-tax returns of various 
investments. 

b) Selection of appropriate investment vehicles 

The next step is selection of appropriate investment vehicles based on the 
above parameters. The actual selection would depend on the individual‟s 
expectations about return and risk. 

In India there are a variety of products that may be considered for the purpose 
of investments. These include: 
 Fixed deposits of banks / corporates, 
 Small savings schemes of post office, 
 Public issues of shares, 
 Debentures or other securities, 
 Mutual funds 
 Unit linked policies that are issued by life insurance companies etc. 

4. Retirement planning 

It is the process of determining the amount of money that an individual needs to 
meet his needs post retirement and deciding on various retirement options for 
meeting these needs. 

Diagram 7: Phases of retirement 

Retirement planning involves three phases 

a) Accumulation: Accumulation of funds is done through various kinds of 
strategies to set aside money for investment with this purpose. 

b) Conservation: Conservation refers to the efforts made to ensure that 
one‟s investments are put to hard work and that the principal gets 
maximised during the individual‟s working years. 

c) Distribution: Distribution refers to the optimal method of converting 
principal (which we may also call the corpus or a nest egg) into 
withdrawals / annuity payments for meeting income needs after 
retirement.
130 
5. Estate planning 
It is a plan for the devolution and transfer of one‟s estate after one‟s demise. 
There are various processes like nomination and assignment or preparation of a 
will. The basic idea is to ensure that one‟s property and assets are smoothly 
distributed and / or utilised according to one‟s wishes after one is no more. 

6. Tax planning 

Finally tax planning is done to determine how to gain maximum tax benefit from 
existing tax laws and for planning of income, expenses and investments taking 
full advantage of the tax breaks. It involves making strategies to reduce, time 
or shift either current or future income tax liabilities. One must note that the 
purpose here is to minimise and not evade taxes. 

By repositioning one‟s investments and seeking out potential tax savings 
opportunities to take advantage of, it is possible to increase one‟s income and 
savings, which otherwise would have gone to the tax authorities. 

Life insurance agents may be often required by their clients and prospective 
customers to advise them not only about meeting their insurance needs but also 
for support in meeting their other financial needs as well. A sound knowledge of 
financial planning and its various types as described above would be of great 
value to any insurance agent. 

Test Yourself 3 

Which among the following is not an objective of tax planning? 

I. Maximum tax benefit 
II. Reduced tax burden as a result of prudent investments 
III. Tax evasion 
IV. Full advantage of tax breaks
131 
Summary 

 
Financial planning is a process of: 

 Identifying one‟s life‟s goals, 
 Translating these identified goals into financial goals and 
 Managing one‟s finances in ways that will help one to achieve those goals 

 
Based on the individual life cycle three types of financial products are 
needed. These help in: 

 Enabling future transactions, 
 Meeting contingencies and 
 Wealth accumulation 

 
The need for financial planning is further increased by the changing societal 
dynamics like disintegration of the joint family, multiple investment choices 
that are available today and changing lifestyles etc. 

 
The best time to start financial planning is right after one receives the first 
salary. 

 
Financial planning advisory services include: 

 Cash planning, 
 Investment planning, 
 Insurance planning, 
 Retirement planning, 
 Estate planning and 
 Tax planning 

Key Terms 

1. Financial planning 
2. Life stages 
3. Risk profile 
4. Cash planning 
5. Investment planning 
6. Insurance planning 
7. Retirement planning 
8. Estate planning 
9. Tax planning
132 
Answers to Test Yourself 

Answer 1 

The correct option is I. 

Insurance provides protection against unforeseen events. 

Answer 2 

The correct option is II. 

As soon as one gets his first salary one should start financial planning. 

Answer 3 

The correct option is III. 

Tax evasion is not an objective of tax planning. 

Self-Examination Questions 

Question 1 

An individual with an aggressive risk profile is likely to follow wealth _______ 
investment style. 

I. Consolidation 
II. Gifting 
III. Accumulation 
IV. Spending 

Question 2 

Which among the following is a wealth accumulation product? 

I. Bank Loans 
II. Shares 
III. Term Insurance Policy 
IV. Savings Bank Account 

Question 3 

Savings can be considered as a composite of two decisions. Choose them from 
the list below. 

I. Risk retention and reduced consumption 
II. Gifting and accumulation 
III. Spending and accumulation 
IV. Postponement of consumption and parting with liquidity
133 
Question 4 

During which stage of life will an individual appreciate past savings the most? 

I. Post retirement 
II. Earner 
III. Learner 
IV. Just married 

Question 5 

What is the relation between investment horizon and returns? 

I. Both are not related at all 
II. Greater the investment horizon the larger the returns 
III. Greater the investment horizon the smaller the returns 
IV. Greater the investment horizon more tax on the returns 

Question 6 

Which among the following can be categorised under transactional products? 

I. Bank deposits 
II. Life insurance 
III. Shares 
IV. Bonds 

Question 7 

Which among the following can be categorised under contingency products? 

I. Bank deposits 
II. Life insurance 
III. Shares 
IV. Bonds 

Question 8 

Which of the below can be categorised under wealth accumulation products? 

I. Bank deposits 
II. Life insurance 
III. General insurance 
IV. Shares
134 
Question 9 

__________ is a rise in the general level of prices of goods and services in an 
economy over a period of time. 

I. Deflation 
II. Inflation 
III. Stagflation 
IV. Hyperinflation 

Question 10 

Which of the below is not a strategy to maximise discretionary income? 

I. Debt restructuring 
II. Loan transfer 
III. Investment restructuring 
IV. Insurance purchase 

Answers to Self-Examination Questions 

Answer 1 

The correct option is III. 

Individual with an aggressive risk profile is likely to follow wealth accumulation 
investment style. 

Answer 2 

The correct option is II. 

Shares are a wealth accumulation product. 

Answer 3 

The correct option is IV. 

Savings is a combination of postponement of consumption and parting with 
liquidity. 

Answer 4 

The correct option is I. 

Post retirement an individual appreciate past savings the most.
135 
Answer 5 

The correct option is II. 

Greater the investment horizon larger will be the returns. 

Answer 6 

The correct option is I. 

Bank deposits can be categorised under transactional products. 

Answer 7 

The correct option is II. 

Life insurance can be categorised under contingency product. 

Answer 8 

The correct option is IV. 

Shares can be categorised under wealth accumulation products. 

Answer 9 

The correct option is II. 

Inflation is a rise in the general level of prices of goods and services in an 
economy over a period of time. 

Answer 10 

The correct option is IV. 

Insurance purchase cannot maximise discretionary income.
136 

CHAPTER 8 

LIFE INSURANCE PRODUCTS – I 

Chapter Introduction 

The chapter introduces you to the world of life insurance products. It begins by 
talking about products in general and then proceeds to discussing the need for 
life insurance products and the role they play in achieving various life goals. 
Finally we look at some traditional life insurance products. 

Learning Outcomes 

A. Overview of life insurance products 
B. Traditional life insurance products
137 
A. Overview of life insurance products 

1. What is a product? 

To begin with let us understand what is meant by a product. In popular terms a 
product is considered same as a commodity– a good brought and sold in the 
marketplace. The term „product‟ comes from the term „reproduce‟ which 
means „to bring forth‟ or „to create‟. In other words, a product is the output or 
result of certain labour or efforts. 

However a good‟s usefulness or utility derives not from the good itself but from 
its features. This brings us to the marketing perspective. From a marketing 
standpoint, a product is a bundle of attributes. Firms differentiate their 
product offerings in the marketplace by packing together different types of 
attributes or different bundles of the same attributes. 

The difference between a product (as used in a marketing sense) and a 
commodity is thus that a product can be differentiated. A commodity cannot. 
This means that the products sold by different companies, though they may 
belong to the same category, may be quite different from one another in terms 
of their features. 

Example 

Colgate, Close up and Promise are all different brands of the same category of 
toothpastes. But the features of each of these brands are different from the 
other. 

A product is not an end in itself but a means to satisfy other ends. In this sense 
products are problem solving tools. They serve as need or want satisfiers. How 
appropriate a product is for the purpose would depend on the features of the 
product. 

Products may be: 
i. 
Tangible: refers to physical objects that can be directly perceived by touch 
(for instance a car or a television set) 
ii. Intangible: refers to products that can only be perceived indirectly. 

Life insurance is a product that is intangible. A life insurance agent has the 
responsibility to enable the customer to understand the features of a particular 
life insurance product, what it can do and how it can serve the customer‟s 
unique needs. 

2. Purpose of life insurance products and needs covered 

Wherever there is risk it is a cause for anxiety. However, we humans have 
sought to master or at least understand risk, to anticipate and be prepared for
138 
it. The instinct and desire to create security against risk has been a key reason 
for the creation of insurance. 

We human beings are social beings who share our lives with others like us – our 
loved ones. We also possess an immensely valuable asset - our human capital – 
which is the source of our productive earning capacity. However, there is an 
uncertainty about life and human well-being. Events like death and disease can 
destroy our productive capabilities and thus cut down or erode the value of our 
human capital. 

Life insurance products offer protection against the loss of economic value of an 
individual‟s productive abilities, which is available to his dependents or to the 
self. The very word „insurance‟ in „life insurance‟ signifies the need to protect 
both oneself and one‟s loved ones against financial loss upon death or 
permanent disability. 

There are other functions, such as savings and investment, but death or dread 
disease coverage is the most common reason for taking out life insurance. In 
specific terms, the potential estate value or the wealth expected to be created 
by the insured individual during his/her remaining earning span of work life, is 
sought to be replaced or compensated to one‟s loved ones or to self, should the 
income generating ability of the insured person be damaged or destroyed during 
the period of the contract. This is done by creating an immediate estate in the 
name of the insured life, the moment the first premium is paid by him. 

So, a life insurance policy, at its core, provides peace of mind and protection 
to the near and dear ones of the individual in case something unfortunate 
happens to him. The other role of life insurance has been as a vehicle for saving 
and wealth accumulation. In this sense, it offers safety and security of 
investment and also a certain rate of return. 

Life insurance is more than an instrument for protecting against death and 
disease. It is also a financial product and may be seen as one among many 
constituents of a portfolio of financial assets rather than as a unique stand-
alone product. In the emerging financial marketplace, customers have multiple 
choices, not only among alternative types of life insurance products but also 
with numerous substitutes to life insurance that have come up, like deposits, 
bonds, stocks and mutual funds. 

In this context, one needs to understand what the value proposition of life 
insurance is. Customer value would depend on how life insurance is perceived 
as a solution to a set of customer needs. 

 Does it offer the right solution? or “Is it effective?” 
 What does it cost? or “is it efficient?” 

Life insurance industry has seen enormous innovations in product offerings over 
the last two centuries. The journey had begun with death benefit products but 
over the period, multiple living benefits like endowment, disability benefits, 
dread disease cover and so on were added.
139 

Similarly from a „participating in profit‟ traditional product, the innovations 
created „market linked‟ policies where the insured was invited to participate in 
choosing and managing his investment assets. Another dimension was added, 
where life insurance products evolved from being a fixed bundle (of defined 
benefits) to highly flexible unbundled products, wherein different benefits as 
well as cost components could be varied by the policy holder as per changing 
needs, affordability and life-stages. 

3. Riders in Life Insurance Products 

We have seen above, how life insurance contracts offer various benefits which 
serve as solutions to a host of needs of their customers. Life insurance 
companies have also offered a number of riders through which the value of their 
offerings can get enhanced. 

A rider is a provision typically added through an endorsement, which then 
becomes part of the contract. Riders are commonly used to provide some sort 
of supplementary benefit or to increase the amount of death benefit provided 
by a policy. 

Riders can be compared to choice of different toppings in a pizza. A base policy 
is like a pizza base and choice of riders is like choice of different pizza toppings 
available to customise the pizza as per an individual‟s requirement. Riders help 
to customise different requirements of a person into a single plan. 

Diagram 1: Choice of Riders 

Riders can be the way through which benefits like Disability cover, accident 
cover and Critical Illness cover can be provided as additional benefits in a 
standard life insurance contract. These riders may be availed of by the 
policyholder by opting for them and paying an additional premium for the 
purpose.
140 
Test Yourself 1 

Which among the following is an intangible product? 

I. Car 
II. House 
III. Life insurance 
IV. Soap
141 
B. Traditional life insurance products 

In this chapter we shall now learn about some of the traditional types of life 
insurance products. 

Diagram 2: Traditional Life Insurance Products 

1. Term insurance plans 

Term insurance is valid only during a certain time period that has been specified 
in the contract. The term can range from as short as it takes to complete an 
airplane trip to as long as forty years. 

Protection may extend up to age 65 or 70. One-year term policies are quite 
similar to property and casualty insurance contracts. All premiums received 
under such a policy may be treated as earned towards the cost of mortality risk 
by the company. There is no savings or cash value element accruing to the 
insured. 

a) Purpose 

A term life insurance fulfills the main and basic idea behind life insurance, 
that is, if the life insured dies prematurely there will be a sum of money 
available to take care of his/her family. This lump sum money represents 
the insured‟s human life value for his loved ones: either chosen arbitrarily 
by self or calculated scientifically.