However, in case of group policies, the malus is charged by way of loading the 
overall premium suitably to keep the claim ratio within reasonable limits. On 
the other hand if experience is good a discount in premium rate is allowed 
which is turned as Bonus. 

13. No claim discount 

Some products provide for a discount on premium for every claim free year 
instead of a bonus on sum insured. 

14. Co-payment 

Co-payment is the concept of the insured bearing a portion of each and every 
claim under a health policy. These could be compulsory or voluntary depending 
on the product. Co-payment brings in a certain discipline among the insured to 
avoid unnecessary hospitalizations. 

Some products in the market have co-payment clauses in respect of certain 
diseases only, such as major surgeries, or commonly occurring surgeries, or for 
persons above a certain age.
392 
15. Deductible / Excess 

Also called as excess, in health policies, it is the fixed amount of money the 
insured is required to pay initially before the claim is paid by insurer, for e.g. if 
the deductible in a policy is Rs. 10,000, the insured pays first Rs. 10,000 in each 
insured loss claimed for. To illustrate, if the claim is for Rs. 80,000, the insured 
bears the first Rs. 10,000 and the insurer pays Rs. 70,000. 

Deductible may also be a specified number of days/hours in case of hospital 
cash policies which will apply before any benefits are payable by the insurer. 

16. Room rent restrictions 

While several products are open ended with the sum insured being the 
maximum amount payable in the event of a claim, several products today place 
a restriction on the category of room that an insured chooses by linking it to the 
sum insured. Experience shows that all expenses of hospitalization follow the 
room rent, with higher room rent leading to proportionately higher charges 
under all heads of expenses. Hence a person with a sum insured of one lac 
would be entitled to a room of Rs 1,000 per day if the policy has a room rent 
restriction of 1% of sum insured per day. This clearly indicates that if one 
prefers luxury treatment at high end hospitals, then the policy too should be 
purchased for high sums insured at appropriate premium. 

17. Renewability clause 

The IRDA guidelines on renewability of health insurance policies makes lifetime 
guaranteed renewal of the health policies compulsory. An insurance company 
can deny renewal only on the grounds of fraud or misrepresentation or 
suppression by insured (or on his behalf) either in obtaining insurance or 
subsequently in relation thereto. 

18. Cancellation clause 

The cancellation clause is also standardized by regulatory provisions and an 
insurance company may at any time cancel the policy only on grounds of 
misrepresentation, fraud, non-disclosure of material fact or non-cooperation by 
the insured. 

A minimum of fifteen days‟ notice in writing by registered A/D to the insured at 
his last known address is required. Where a policy is cancelled by the insurer, 
the company shall return to the insured a proportion of the last premium 
corresponding to the unexpired period of insurance provided no claim has been 
paid under the policy. 

In the event of cancellation by the insured, premium refund is on short period 
rates, meaning insured would receive refund of premium for a percentage less 
than the pro-rata. If a claim is made no refund would be made.
393 
19. Free look in period 

If a customer has bought a new insurance policy and received the policy 
document and then finds that the terms and conditions are not what he wanted, 
what are his options? 

IRDAI has built into its regulations a consumer-friendly provision that takes care 
this problem. The customer can return it and get a refund subject to the 
following conditions: 

1. This applies only to life insurance policies and to health insurance 
policies with tenure of at least one year. 
2. The customer must exercise this right within 15 days of receiving the 
policy document 
3. He has to communicate the same to the insurer in writing 
4. The premium refund will be available only if no claim has been made on 
the policy and will be adjusted for 
a) proportionate risk premium for the period on cover 
b) expenses incurred by the insurer on medical examination and 
c) stamp duty charges 

20. Grace period for renewal 

A significant feature of a health insurance policy is maintaining continuity of 
insurance. As benefits under a policy are maintained only if policies are 
renewed without break, timely renewal is of great importance. 

As per IRDAI guidelines, a 30 days grace period is allowed for renewal of 
individual health policies. 

All continuity benefits are maintained if the policy is renewed within 30 days 
from expiry of the earlier insurance. Claims, if any, during the break period will 
not be considered. 

Insurers may consider granting a longer grace period for renewal, depending on 
individual products. 

Most of above key clauses, definitions, exclusions have been standardized under 
Health Regulations and Health Insurance Standardization guidelines issued by 
IRDA. Students are advised to go through the same and also keep themselves 
updated on guidelines and circulars issued by IRDA from time to time.
394 
Test Yourself 9 

As per IRDA guidelines, a ________ grace period is allowed for renewal of 
individual health policies. 

I. Fifteen days 
II. Thirty days 
III. Forty Five days 
IV. Sixty days 

Summary 

a) A health insurance policy provides financial protection to the insured person 
in the event of an unforeseen and sudden accident / illness leading to 
hospitalization. 

b) Health insurance products can be classified on the basis of number of people 
covered under the policy: individual policy, family floater policy, group 
policy. 

c) A hospitalization expenses policy or Mediclaim reimburses the cost of 
hospitalization expenses incurred on account of illness / accident. 

d) Pre hospitalization expenses would be relevant medical expenses incurred 
during period up to the defined number of days (generally 30 days) prior to 
hospitalization and will be considered as part of claim. 

e) Post hospitalization expenses would be relevant medical expenses incurred 
during period up to the defined number of days (generally 60 days) after 
hospitalization and will be considered as part of claim. 

f) In a family floater policy, the family consisting of spouse, dependent 
children and dependent parents are offered a single sum insured which 
floats over the entire family. 

g) A hospital daily cash policy provides a fixed sum to the insured person for 
each day of hospitalization. 

h) Critical illness policy is a benefit policy with a provision to pay a lump sum 
amount on diagnosis of certain named critical illness. 

i) High Deductible or Top-up Covers offer cover for higher sum insured over 
and above a specified chosen amount (called threshold or deductible). 

j) The fixed benefits cover provides adequate cover to the insured person and 
also helps the insurer to effectively price his policy 

k) A Personal Accident (PA) Cover provides compensation in the form of death 
and disability benefits due to unforeseen accidents.
395 

l) Out-patient covers provide for medical expenses like dental treatments, 
vision care expenses, routine medical examinations and tests etc. that do 
not require hospitalization. 

m) A group policy is taken by a group owner who could be an employer, an 
association, a bank‟s credit card division, where a single policy covers the 
entire group of individuals. 

n) Corporate Floater or Buffer Cover amount helps meet excess expenses over 
and above the family sum insured. 

o) Overseas Mediclaim / Travel Policies provide cover to an individual against 
exposure to the risk of accident, injury and sickness during his stay 
overseas. 

p) Corporate Frequent Travelers‟ Plan is an annual policy whereby a corporate 
takes individual policies for its executives who frequently make trips outside 
India. 

q) Many terms used in health insurance have been standardized by IRDA by 
regulation to avoid confusion especially for the insureds. 

Answers to Test Yourself 

Answer 1 

The correct option is II. 

Though the duration of cover for pre-hospitalization expenses would vary from 
insurer to insurer and is defined in the policy, the most common cover is for 
thirty days pre-hospitalization. 

Answer 2 

The correct option is I. 

As per IRDA guidelines, a 30 days grace period is allowed for renewal of 
individual health policies. 

Self-Examination Questions 

Question 1 

Which of the below statement is correct with regards to a hospitalization 
expenses policy? 

I. Only hospitalization expenses are covered
396 
II. Hospitalization as well as pre and post hospitalization expenses are covered 
III. Hospitalization as well as pre and post hospitalization expenses are covered 
and a lumpsum amount is paid to the family members in the event of 
insured‟s death 
IV. Hospitalization expenses are covered from the first year and pre and post 
hospitalization expenses are covered from the second year if the first year is 
claim free. 

Question 2 

Identify which of the below statement is correct? 

I. Health insurance deals with morbidity 
II. Health insurance deals with mortality 
III. Health insurance deals with morbidity as well as mortality 
IV. Health insurance neither deals with morbidity or mortality 

Question 3 

Which of the below statement is correct with regards to cashless service 
provided in health insurance? 

I. It is an environment friendly go-green initiative started by insurance 
companies to promote electronic payments so that circulation of physical 
cash notes can be reduced and trees can be saved. 
II. Service is provided free of cost to the insured and no cash is to be paid as 
the payment is made by the Government to the insurance company under a 
special scheme 
III. All payments made by insured have to be made only through internet 
banking or cards as cash is not accepted by the insurance company 
IV. The insured does not pay and the insurance company settles the bill directly 
with the hospital 

Question 4 

Identify the correct full form of PPN with regards to hospitals in health 
insurance. 

I. Public Preferred Network 
II. Preferred Provider Network 
III. Public Private Network 
IV. Provider Preferential Network 

Question 5 

Identify which of the below statement is incorrect? 

I. An employer can take a group policy for his employees
397 
II. A bank can take a group policy for its customers 
III. A shopkeeper can take a group policy for its customers 
IV. A group policy taken by the employer for his employees can be extended to 
include the family members of the employees
398 

Answers to Self-Examination Questions 

Answer 1 

The correct option is II. 

In a hospitalization expenses policy, hospitalization as well as pre and post 
hospitalization expenses are covered. 

Answer 2 

The correct option is I. 

Health insurance deals with morbidity (rate of incidence of disease). 

Answer 3 

The correct option is IV. 

Under the cashless service, the insured does not pay and the insurance company 
settles the bill directly with the hospital. 

Answer 4 

The correct option is II. 

PPN stands for Preferred Provider Network. 

Answer 5 

The correct option is III. 

Statements I, II and IV are correct. Statement III is incorrect as a shopkeeper 
cannot take group insurance for its customers.
399 
CHAPTER 20 

HEALTH INSURANCE UNDERWRITING 
Chapter Introduction 

This chapter aims to provide you detailed knowledge about underwriting in 
health insurance. Underwriting is a very important aspect of any type of 
insurance and plays a vital role in issuance of an insurance policy. In this 
chapter, you will get an understanding about basic principles, tools, methods 
and process of underwriting. It will also provide you the knowledge about group 
health insurance underwriting. 

Learning Outcomes 

A. What is underwriting? 
B. Underwriting - Basic concepts 
C. File and Use guidelines 
D. Other health insurance regulations of IRDAI 
E. Basic principles and tools for underwriting 
F. Underwriting process 
G. Group health insurance 
H. Underwriting of Overseas Travel Insurance 
I. Underwriting of Personal Accident Insurance 

After studying this chapter, you should be able to: 

a) Explain what is meant by underwriting 
b) Describe the basic concepts of underwriting 
c) Explain the principles and the various tools followed by underwriters 
d) Appreciate the complete process of underwriting individual health policies 
e) Discuss how group health policies are underwritten
400 

Look at this Scenario 

Manish aged 48 years, working as a software engineer, decided to take a health 
insurance policy for himself. He went to an insurance company, where they 
gave him a proposal form in which he was required to answer a number of 
questions related to his physical build and health, mental health, pre-existing 
illnesses, his family health history, habits and so on. 

On receipt of his proposal form, he was also required to submit many 
documents such as identity and age proof, proof of address and previous 
medical records. Then they told him to undergo a health check-up and some 
medical tests which frustrated him. 

Manish, who considered himself a healthy person and with a good income level, 
started wondering why such a lengthy process was being followed by the 
insurance company in his case. Even after going through all this, the insurance 
company told him that high cholesterol and high BP had been diagnosed in his 
medical tests, which increased the chances of heart diseases later. Though they 
offered him a policy, the premium was much higher than what his friend had 
paid and so he refused to take the policy. 

Here, the insurance company was following all these steps as part of their 
underwriting process. While providing risk coverage, an insurer needs to 
evaluate risks properly and also to make reasonable profit. If the risk is not 
assessed properly and there is a claim, it will result in a loss. Moreover, insurers 
collect premiums on behalf of all insuring persons and have to handle these 
moneys like a trust.
401 
A. What is underwriting? 

1. Underwriting 

Insurance companies try to insure people who are expected to pay adequate 
premium in proportion to the risk they bring to the insurance pool. This process 
of collecting and analyzing information from a proposer for the risk selection is 
known as underwriting. On the basis of information collected through this 
process, they decide whether they want to insure a proposer. If they decide to 
do so, then at what premium, terms and conditions so as to make a reasonable 
profit from taking such risk. 

Health insurance is based on the concept of morbidity. Here morbidity is 
defined as the likelihood and risk of a person becoming ill or sick thereby 
requiring treatment or hospitalization. To a large extent, morbidity is 
influenced by age (generally being higher in senior citizens than in young adults) 
and also increases due to various other adverse factors, such as being 
overweight or underweight, personal history of certain past and present 
diseases or ailments, personal habits like smoking, current health status and 
also occupation of the proposer if it is deemed to be hazardous. Conversely, 
morbidity also decreases due to certain favourable factors like lower age, a 
healthy lifestyle etc. 

Definition 

Underwriting is the process of assessing the risk appropriately and deciding the 
terms on which the insurance cover is to be granted. Thus, it is a process of risk 
selection and risk pricing. 

2. Need for underwriting 

Underwriting is the backbone of an insurance company as acceptance of the risk 
carelessly or for insufficient premiums will lead to insurer‟s insolvency. On the 
other hand, being too selective or careful will prevent the insurance company 
from creating a big pool so as to spread the risk uniformly. It is therefore 
critical to strike the correct balance between risk and business, thereby being 
competitive and yet profitable for the organization. 

This process of balancing is done by the underwriter, in accordance with the 
philosophy, policies and risk hunger of the insurance company concerned. The 
job of the underwriter is to classify the risk and decide the terms of acceptance 
at a proper price. It is important to note that acceptance of risk is like giving a 
promise of future claim settlement to the insured.
402 
3. Underwriting – risk assessment 

Underwriting is a process of risk selection which is based upon the 
characteristics of a group or individual. Here based on the degree of the risk, 
the underwriter decides whether to accept the risk and at what price. Under 
any circumstances, the process of acceptance has to be done with fairness and 
on an equitable basis i.e. every similar risk should be classified equally without 
any prejudice. This classification is normally done through standard acceptance 
charts whereby every represented risk is quantified and premiums are 
calculated accordingly. 

Although age affects the chance of sickness as well as death, it must be 
remembered that sickness usually comes much before death and could be 
frequent. Hence, it is quite logical that the underwriting norms and guidelines 
are much tighter for health coverage than death coverage. 

Example 

An individual who is diabetic has a far higher chance of developing a cardiac or 
kidney complication requiring hospitalization than of death, and also health 
episodes can happen multiple times during the course of insurance coverage. A 
life insurance underwriting guideline might rate this individual as an average 
risk. However, for medical underwriting, he would be rated as a higher risk. 

In health insurance, there is a higher focus on medical or health findings than 
financial or income based underwriting. However, the latter cannot be ignored 
as there has to be an insurable interest and financial underwriting is important 
to rule out any adverse selection and ensure continuity in health insurance. 

4. Factors which affect chance of illness 

The factors which affect morbidity (risk of falling ill) should be considered 
carefully while assessing risk are as follows: 

a) Age: Premiums are charged corresponding with age and the degree of 
risk. For e.g. the morbidity premiums for infants and children are higher 
than young adults due to increased risk of infections and accidents. 
Similarly, for adults beyond the age of 45 years, the premiums are 
higher, as the probability of an individual suffering from a chronic 
ailment like diabetes, a sudden heart ailment or other such morbidity is 
much higher. 

b) Gender: Women are exposed to additional risk of morbidity during child 
bearing period. However, men are more likely to get affected by heart 
attacks than women or suffer job related accidents than women as they 
may be more involved in hazardous employment. 

c) Habits: Consumption of tobacco, alcohol or narcotics in any form has a 
direct bearing on the morbidity risk.
403 

d) Occupation: Extra risk to accidents is possible in certain occupations, 
e.g. driver, blaster, aviator etc. Likewise, certain occupations may have 
higher health risks, like an X-Ray machine operator, asbestos industry 
workers, miners etc. 

e) Family history: This has greater relevance, as genetic factors influence 
diseases like asthma, diabetes and certain cancers. This does impact the 
morbidity and should be taken into consideration while accepting risk. 

f) Build: Stout, thin or average build may also be linked to morbidity in 
certain groups. 

g) Past illness or surgery: It has to be ascertained whether the past illness 
has any possibility of causing increased physical weakness or even recur 
and accordingly the policy terms should be decided. For e.g. kidney 
stones are known to recur and similarly, cataract in one eye increases 
possibility of cataract in the other eye. 

h) Current health status and other factors or complaints: This is 
important to ascertain the degree of risk and insurability and can be 
established by proper disclosure and medical examination. 

i) Environment and residence: These also have a bearing on morbidity 
rates. 

Test Yourself 1 

Underwriting is the process of ___________. 

I. Marketing insurance products 
II. Collecting premiums from customers 
III. Risk selection and risk pricing 
IV. Selling various insurance products
404 
B. Underwriting – Basic concepts 

1. Underwriting purpose 

We begin with examining the purpose of underwriting. There are two purposes 

i. To prevent anti-selection that is selection against the insurer 
ii. To classify risks and ensure equity among risks 

Definition 

The term selection of risks refers to the process of evaluating each proposal for 
health insurance in terms of the degree of risk it represents and then deciding 
whether or not to grant insurance and on what terms. 

Anti-selection (or adverse selection) is the tendency of people, who suspect or 
know that their chance of experiencing a loss is high, to seek out insurance 
eagerly and to gain in the process. 

Example 

If insurers were not selective about whom and how they offered insurance, 
there is a chance that people with serious ailments like diabetes, high BP, heart 
problems or cancer, who knew that they would soon require hospitalization, 
would seek to buy health insurance, create losses for the insurer. 

In other words, if an insurer did not exercise selection it would be selected 
against and suffer losses in the process. 

2. Equity among risks 

Let us now consider equity among risks. The term “Equity” means that 
applicants who are exposed to similar degrees of risk must be placed in the 
same premium class. Insurers would like to have some type of standardization 
to determine the premiums to be charged. Thus people posing average risks 
should pay similar premium while people who pose higher risks should pay 
higher premium. They would like standardization to apply to the vast majority 
of individuals who pose average risks while they could devote more time to 
decide upon and rate risks which are more risky. 

a) Risk classification 

To usher equity, the underwriter engages in a process known as risk 
classification i.e. individuals are categorized and assigned to different risk 
classes depending on the degree of risks they pose. There are four such risk 
classes.
405 
i. 
Standard risks 

These consist of those people whose anticipated morbidity (chance of falling 
ill) is average. 

ii. Preferred risks 

These are the ones whose anticipated morbidity is significantly lower than 
average and hence could be charged a lower premium. 

iii. Substandard risks 

These are the ones whose anticipated morbidity is higher than the average, 
but are still considered to be insurable. They may be accepted for insurance 
with higher (or extra) premiums or subjected to certain restrictions. 

iv. Declined risks 

These are the ones whose impairments and anticipated extra morbidity are 
so great that they could not be provided insurance coverage at an affordable 
cost. Sometimes an individual‟s proposal may also be temporarily declined if 
he or she has been exposed to a recent medical event, like an operation. 

3. Selection process 

Underwriting or the selection process may be said to take place at two levels: 

 At field level 
 At underwriting department level 

Diagram 7: Underwriting or the selection process 

c) Field or Primary level 

Field level underwriting may also be known as primary underwriting. It 
includes information gathering by an agent or company representative to 
decide whether an applicant is suitable for granting insurance coverage. The
406 
agent plays a critical role as primary underwriter. He is in the best position 
to know the prospective client to be insured. 

 A few insurance companies may require that agents complete a statement or 
a confidential report, asking for specific information, opinion and 
recommendations to be provided by the agent with respect to the proposer. 

A similar kind of report, which has been called as Moral Hazard report, may 
also be sought from an official of the insurance company. These reports 
typically cover the occupation, income and financial standing and reputation 
of the proposed life. 

What is Moral Hazard? 

While factors like age, gender, habits etc. refer to the physical hazard of a 
health risk, there is something else that needs to be closely watched. This is 
the moral hazard of the client which can prove very costly to the insurance 
company. 

An extreme example of bad moral hazard is that of an insured taking health 
insurance knowing that he will undergo a surgical operation within a short 
time but not disclosing this to the insurer. There is thus a deliberate 
intention of taking insurance just to collect a claim. 

Indifference towards loss is another example. Because of the existence of 
insurance, the insured may be tempted to adopt a careless attitude towards 
his health knowing that any hospitalization would be paid by his insurer. 

Another type of hazard called „morale hazard‟ is also worthy of mention. 
Here the insured would not commit any fraud but, knowing that he has a 
large sum insured, he would prefer to take the most expensive treatment, 
staying in the most expensive hospital room etc. which he would not have 
done had he not been insured. 

Fraud monitoring and role of agent as primary underwriter 

Much of the decision with regard to selection of a risk depends on the facts 
that have been disclosed by the proposer in the proposal form. It may be 
difficult for an underwriter who is sitting in the underwriting department to 
know whether these facts are untrue and have been fraudulently 
misrepresented with deliberate intent to deceive. 

The agent plays a significant role here. He or she is in the best position to 
ascertain that the facts that have been represented are true, since the agent 
has direct and personal contact with the proposer and can thus monitor if 
any willful non-disclosure or misrepresentation has been made with an intent 
to mislead.
407 
d) Underwriting department level 

The second level of underwriting is at the department or office level. It 
involves specialists and persons who are proficient in such work and who 
consider all the relevant data on the case to decide whether to accept a 
proposal for insurance and on what terms.
408 
C. File and Use guidelines 

It must be remembered that every insurer has to create it products before 
marketing them and this is also one of the functions of the underwriting 
department. The IRDAI has issued guidelines for this which are summarized 
below: 

Every company designs its products keeping in mind the target customers‟ 
needs, wants and affordability, underwriting considerations, actuarial pricing, 
competitive conditions in the market etc. Thus we see high number of options 
for different categories of customers to choose from even though at the base 
level, hospitalization expense indemnity products dominate the Indian market. 

Every new product needs approval of IRDA before introduction. The product 
needs to be filed with the Regulator under „File and Use‟ provisions as 
mentioned below. Once introduced, product withdrawal also needs to follow 
guidelines. Students are advised to familiarize themselves with all provisions, 
forms, returns etc. related to File and Use guidelines. 

File and use procedure for health insurance products as per IRDA guidelines: 

a) No health insurance product shall be marketed by any insurer unless it 
has the prior clearance of the Authority accorded as per the File and Use 
Procedure. 

b) Any subsequent revision or modification of any approved health 
insurance product shall also require the prior clearance of the Authority 
as per the guidelines issued from time to time. 

1. Any revision or modification in a policy which is approved by the 
Authority shall be notified to each policy holder at least three 
months prior to the date when such revision or modification comes 
into effect. The notice shall set out the reasons for such revision or 
modification, in particular the reason for an increase in premium 
and the quantum of such increase. 

2. The possibility of a revision or modification of the terms of the 
policy including the premium must be disclosed in the prospectus. 

c) The File and Use application form has been standardized by IRDAI and 
has to be sent along with many annexures including the Database sheet 
and the Customer Information Sheet. 

The Customer Information Sheet which is to be given to every insured 
along with the prospectus and the policy contains details of the cover, 
the exclusions, waiting period if any before claim becomes payable, 
whether the payout will be on reimbursement basis or a fixed amount, 
renewal conditions and benefits, details of co-pay or deductible and 
cancellation conditions etc.
409 

The File and Use application for the prior approval of the Authority shall 
be certified by the Appointed Actuary and the CEO of the insurance 
company and shall be in such formats and accompanied by such 
documentation as may be stipulated by the Authority from time to time. 

d) Withdrawal of health insurance product 

1. To withdraw a health insurance product, the insurer shall take 
prior approval of the Authority by giving reasons for withdrawal 
and complete details of the treatment to the existing -
policyholders. 

2. The policy document shall clearly indicate the possibility of 
withdrawal of the products in the future and the options that 
would be available to the policyholder on withdrawal of the 
products. 

3. If the existing customer does not respond to the insurer‟s 
intimation, the policy shall be withdrawn on the renewal date and 
the insured shall have to take a new policy available with the 
insurer, subject to portability conditions. 

4. The withdrawn product shall not be offered to the prospective 
customers. 

e) All particulars of any product shall after introduction be reviewed by the 
Appointed Actuary at least once a year. If the product is found to be 
financially unviable, or is deficient in any particular the Appointed 
Actuary may revise the product appropriately and apply for revision 
under File and Use procedure. 

f) Five years after a product has been accorded File and Use approval, the 
Appointed Actuary shall review the performance of the product in terms 
of morbidity, lapse, interest rates, inflation, expenses and other 
relevant particulars as compared to the original assumptions made while 
designing such product and seek fresh approval with suitable 
justifications or modifications of the earlier assumptions made.
410 
D. Other Health Insurance regulations of IRDAI 

In addition to the File and Use guidelines, the Health Insurance regulations also 
require the following: 

a. All Insurance Company‟s shall evolve a Health Insurance Underwriting 
Policy which shall be approved by the Board of the Company. The policy 
should among other matters prescribe the proposal form in which 
prospects may apply for purchasing a Health Policy. Such form should 
capture all the information necessary to underwrite a proposal in 
accordance with the stated Policy of the Company. 
b. The Underwriting Policy shall be filed with the Authority. The Company 
retains the right to modify the Policy as it deems necessary, but every 
modification shall also be filed with the Authority. 
c. Any proposal for health insurance may be accepted or denied wholly 
based on the Board approved underwriting policy. A denial of a proposal 
shall be communicated to the prospect in writing, recording the reasons 
for denial. 
d. The insured shall be informed of any underwriting loading charged over 
and above the premium and the specific consent of the policyholder for 
such loadings shall be obtained before issuance of a policy. 
e. If an insurance company requires any further information, such as 
change of occupation, at any subsequent stage of a policy or at the time 
of its renewal, it shall prescribe standard forms to be filled up by the 
insured and shall make these forms part of the policy document, clearly 
state the events which will require the submission of such information 
and the conditions applicable in such event. 
f. Insurers may devise mechanisms or incentives to reward policyholders for 
early entry, continued renewals, favourable claims experience etc. with 
the same insurer and disclose upfront such mechanism or incentives in 
the prospectus and the policy document, as approved under File and Use 
guidelines. 

Guidelines regarding portability of health policies 

IRDAI has brought out very clear guidelines regarding portability of life and 
health insurance policies. These are enumerated below: 

1. Portability shall be allowed in the following cases: 
a. All individual health insurance policies issued by non-life insurance 
companies including family floater policies 
b. Individual members, including the family members covered under any 
group health insurance policy of a non-life insurance company shall 
have the right to migrate from such a group policy to an individual 
health insurance policy or a family floater policy with the same insurer. 
Thereafter, he/she shall be accorded the right for portability at next 
renewal.
411 
2. Portability can be opted by the policyholder only at renewal and not during 
currency of the policy. 

3. A policyholder wanting to port his policy to another insurance company has 
to apply to such insurance company, to port the entire policy along with all 
the members of the family, if any, at least 45 days before the premium 
renewal date of the existing policy. 

4. The new insurer may or may not offer portability if policyholder fails to 
make an application in the IRDAI-prescribed form at least 45 days before 
the premium renewal date. 

5. On receipt of such intimation, the insurance company shall furnish the 
applicant, the Portability Form as set out in Annexure 'I' to the IRDAI 
guidelines together with a proposal form and relevant product literature on 
the various health insurance products which could be offered. 

6. The policyholder shall fill in the portability form along with proposal form 
and submit the same to the insurance company. 

7. On receipt of the Portability Form, the insurance company shall address the 
existing insurance company seeking necessary details of medical history and 
claim history of the concerned policyholder. This shall be done through the 
web portal of the IRDA. 

8. The insurance company receiving such a request on portability shall furnish 
the requisite data in the data format for porting insurance policies 
prescribed in the web portal of IRDA within 7 working days of the receipt of 
the request. 

9. In case the existing insurer fails to provide the requisite data in the data 
format to the new insurance company within the specified time frame, it 
shall be viewed as violation of directions issued by the IRDA and the insurer 
shall be subject to penal provisions under the Insurance Act, 1938. 

10. On receipt of the data from the existing insurance company, the new 
insurance company may underwrite the proposal and convey its decision to 
the policyholder in accordance with the Regulation 4 (6) of the IRDA 
(Protection of Policyholders' interest) Regulations, 2002. 

11. If on receipt of data within the above time frame, the insurance company 
does not communicate its decision to the requesting policyholder within 15 
days in accordance with its underwriting policy as filed by the company 
with the Authority, then the insurance company shall not retain the right to 
reject such proposal and shall have to accept the proposal. 

12. Where the outcome of acceptance of portability is still awaited from the 
new insurer on the date of renewal
412 
a. the existing policy shall be allowed to be extended, if requested by the
policyholder, for the short period by accepting a pro- rate premium for such
short period, which shall be of at least one month and 
b. the existing policy shall not be cancelled until such time a confirmed policy
from new insurer is received or at the specific written request of the insured 
c. the new insurer, in all such cases, shall reckon the date of the
commencement of risk to match with date of expiry of the short period,
wherever relevant. 
d. if for any reason the insured intends to continue the policy further with the
existing insurer, it shall be allowed to continue by charging a regular
premium and without imposing any new condition. 
13. In case the policyholder has opted short period extension as stated above 
and there is a claim, then existing insurer may charge the balance premium 
for remaining part of the policy year provided the claims is accepted by the 
existing insurer. In such cases, policyholder shall be liable to pay the 
premium for the balance period and continue with existing insurer for that 
policy year. 

14. In order to accept a policy which is porting-in, insurer shall not levy any 
additional loading or charges exclusively for the purpose of porting. 

15. No commission shall be payable to any intermediary on the acceptance of a 
ported policy. 

16. For any health insurance policy, waiting period already elapsed under the 
existing policy with respect to pre-existing diseases and time bound 
exclusions shall be taken into account and reduced to that extent under the 
newly ported policy. 
Note 1: In case the waiting period for a certain disease or treatment in the 
new policy is longer than that in the earlier policy for the same 
disease or treatment, the additional waiting period should be 
clearly explained to the incoming policy holder in the portability 
form to be submitted by the porting policyholder. 
Note 2: For group health insurance policies, the individual member's shall 
be given credit as stated above based on the number of years of 
continuous insurance cover, irrespective of, whether the previous 
policy had any pre-existing disease exclusion/time bound 
exclusions. 
17. The portability shall be applicable to the sum insured under the previous 
policy and also to an enhanced sum insured, if requested by the insured, to 
the extent of cumulative bonus acquired from the previous insurer(s) under 
the previous policies.
413 
For e.g. - If a person had a SI of Rs. 2 lakhs and accrued bonus of Rs. 50,000 
with insurer A; when he shifts to insurer B and the proposal is accepted, 
insurer B has to offer him SI of Rs. 2.50 lakhs by charging the premium 
applicable for Rs. 2.50 lakhs. If insurer B has no product for Rs. 2.50 lakhs, 
insurer B would offer the nearest higher slab say Rs. 3 lakhs to insured by 
charging premium applicable for Rs. 3 lakhs SI. However, portability would 
be available only up to Rs 2.50 lakhs. 
18. Insurers shall clearly draw the attention of the policyholder in the policy 
contract and the promotional material like prospectus, sales literature or 
any other documents in any form whatsoever, that: 
a. all health insurance policies are portable; 
b. policyholder should initiate action to approach another insurer, to 
take advantage of portability, well before the renewal date to 
avoid any break in the policy coverage due to delays in acceptance 
of the proposal by the other insurer.
414 
E. Basic principles of insurance and tools for underwriting 

1. Basic principles relevant to underwriting 

In any form of insurance, whether it is life insurance or general insurance, there 
are certain legal principles which operate along with acceptance of risks. Health 
insurance is equally governed by these principles and any violation of the 
principles results in the insurer deciding to avoid the liability, much to the 
dissatisfaction and frustration of the policyholders. These core principles are: 

1. Utmost good faith (Uberrima fides) and the insurable interest 

2. Tools for underwriting 

These are the sources of information for the underwriter and the basis on which 
the risk classification is done and premiums finally decided. The following are 
the key tools for underwriting: 
a) Proposal form 

This document is the base of the contract where all the critical information 
pertaining to the health and personal details of the proposer (i.e. age, 
occupation, build, habits, health status, income, premium payment details 
etc.) are collected. This could range from a set of simple questions to a fully 
detailed questionnaire according to product and the needs/policy of the 
company, so as to ensure that all material facts are disclosed and the 
coverage is given accordingly. Any breach or concealment of information by 
the insured shall render the policy void. 

b) Age proof 

Premiums are determined on the basis of the age of the insured. Hence it is 
imperative that the age disclosed at the time of enrollment is verified 
through submission of an age proof. 

Example 

In India, there are many documents which can be considered as age proof but 
all of them are not legally acceptable. Mostly valid documents are divided into 
two broad categories. They are as follows: 

a) Standard age proof: Some of these include school certificate, passport, 
domicile certificate, PAN card etc. 
b) Non-standard age proof: Some of these include ration card, voter ID, 
elder‟s declaration, gram panchayat certificate etc.
415 
c) Financial documents 

Knowing the financial status of the proposer is particularly relevant for 
benefit products and to reduce the moral hazard. However, normally the 
financial documents are only asked for in cases of 
a) Personal accident covers or 
b) high sum assured coverage or 
c) when the stated income and occupation as compared to the coverage 
sought, show a mismatch. 

d) Medical reports 

Requirement of medical reports is based on the norms of the insurer, and 
usually depends upon the age of the insured and sometimes on the amount 
of cover opted. Some replies in the proposal form may also contain some 
information that leads to medical reports being asked for. 

e) Reports of sales personnel 

Sales personnel can also be seen as grassroots level underwriters for the 
company and the information given by them in their report could form an 
important consideration. However, as the sales personnel have an incentive 
to generate more business, there is a conflict of interest which has to be 
watched out for. 

Test Yourself 2 

The principle of utmost good faith in underwriting is required to be followed by 
___________. 

I. The insurer 
II. The insured 
III. Both the insurer and the insured 
IV. The medical examiners 

Test Yourself 3 

Insurable interest refers to ____________. 

I. Financial interest of the person in the asset to be insured 
II. The asset which is already insured 
III. Each insurer‟s share of loss when more than one company covers the same 
loss 
IV. The amount of the loss that can be recovered from the insurer
416 
F. Underwriting process 

Once the required information is received, the underwriter decides the terms of 
the policy. The common forms used for underwriting health insurance business 
are as below: 

1. Medical underwriting 

Medical underwriting is a process in which medical reports are called for from 
the proposer to determine the health status of an individual applying for health 
insurance policy. The health information collected is then evaluated by the 
insurers to determine whether to offer coverage, up to what limit and on what 
conditions and exclusions. Thus medical underwriting can determine the 
acceptance or declining of a risk and also the terms of cover. 

However, medical underwriting involves high costs in terms of receiving and 
examining medical reports. Also, when insurers use a high degree of medical 
underwriting, they are blamed for „cream-skimming‟ (accepting only the best 
kind of risk and denying others). It also causes frustration among prospective 
clients and reduces the number of people willing to insure with those insurers as 
they do not want to provide the requisite information and detail and to undergo 
the required tests. 

Health status and age are important underwriting considerations for individual 
health insurance. Also current health status, personal and family medical 
history enable an underwriter to determine presence of any pre-existing 
diseases or conditions and eventually the probability of future health problems 
that may require hospitalization or surgical intervention. 

Further proposal forms are designed in a manner to elicit information about 
past treatments taken, hospitalizations and surgeries undergone. This helps an 
underwriter to evaluate the possibility of recurrence of an earlier ailment, its 
impact on current or future health status or future complications. Some 
diseases for which the proposer is taking medicines only may soon require 
hospitalization any time soon or recur. 

Example 

Medical conditions like hypertension, overweight/obesity and raised sugar levels 
have a high probability of future hospitalization for diseases of the heart, 
kidney and the nervous system. So, these conditions should be carefully 
considered while assessing the risk for medical underwriting. 

Since adverse changes in health status generally occur post 40 years, mainly due 
to normal ageing process, insurers do not require any medical examination or 
tests of the proposer earlier than the age of 45 years (some insurers could raise 
this requirement to 50 or 55 years too). Medical underwriting guidelines may 
also require a signed declaration of the proposer‟s health status by his/her 
family physician.
417 

In the Indian health insurance market, the key medical underwriting factor for 
individual health insurance is the age of the person. Persons above the age of 
45-50 years, enrolling for the first time are normally required to undergo 
specified pathological investigations to assess health risk profile and to obtain 
information on their current health status. Such investigations also provide an 
indication of prevalence of any pre-existing medical conditions or diseases. 

Example 

Drugs, alcohol and tobacco consumption may be difficult to detect and seldom 
declared by the proposer in the proposal form. Non-disclosure of these poses a 
major challenge in underwriting of health insurance. Obesity is another problem 
which threatens to become a major public health problem and underwriters 
need to develop underwriting tools to be able to adequately price the 
complications arising out of the same. 

2. Non-medical underwriting 

Most of the proposers which apply for health insurance do not need medical 
examination. If it could be known with a fair degree of accuracy that only one-
tenth or less of such cases will bring the adverse results during medical 
examination, insurers could dispense with medical examination in majority of 
the cases. 

Even, if the proposer were to disclose all material facts completely and 
truthfully and the same were checked by agent carefully, then also the need for 
medical examination could have been much less. In fact, a slight increase in the 
claims ratio can be accepted if there is savings in the costs of medical checkup 
and other expenses and also as it will reduce the inconvenience to the proposer. 

Therefore, insurance companies are coming up with some medical policies 
where the proposer is not required to undergo any medical examination. In such 
cases, companies usually create a „medical grid‟ to indicate at what age and 
stage should a medical underwriting be done, and therefore these non- medical 
limits are carefully designed so as to strike a proper balance between business 
and risk. 

Example