Processing systems today have built in capability to compute the reserves as at 
any point of time. 

Test Yourself 3 

The amount of provision made for all claims in the books of the insurer based on 
the status of the claims is known as ________. 

I. Pooling 
II. Provisioning 
III. Reserving 
IV. Investing
464 

E. Role of third party administrators (TPA) 

1. Introduction of TPAs in India 

The insurance sector was opened to private players in the year 2000. 
Meanwhile, the demand for healthcare products was also growing with new 
products being launched. A need was therefore felt for the introduction of a 
channel for post-sale services in health insurance. This offered the opportunity 
for professional Third Party Administrators to be introduced. 

Seeing this, the Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority allowed TPAs 
to be introduced into the market under license from IRDAI, provided they 
complied with The IRDAI (Third Party Administrators – Health Insurance) 
Regulations, 2001 notified on 17th Sept 2001. 

Definition 

As per Regulations, 

"Third Party Administrators or TPA means any person who is licensed under the 
IRDAI (Third Party Administrators - Health Services) Regulations, 2001 by the 
Authority, and is engaged, for a fee or remuneration by an insurance company, 
for the purposes of providing health services. 

"Health Services by TPA" means the services rendered by a TPA to an insurer 
under an agreement in connection with health insurance business but does not 
include the business of an insurance company or the soliciting either directly or 
indirectly, of health insurance business or deciding on the admissibility of a 
claim or its rejection. 

Thus the scope of TPA services starts after the sale and issue of the insurance 
policy. In case of insurers not using TPAs, the services are performed by in-
house team. 

2. Post sale service of health insurance 

a) Once the proposal (and the premium) is accepted, the coverage 
commences. 

b) If a TPA is to be used for servicing the policy, the insurer passes on the 
information about the customer and the policy to the TPA. 

c) The TPA enrolls the members (while the proposer is the person taking 
the policy, members are those covered under the policy) and may issue a 
membership identification in the form of a card, either physical or 
electronic.
465 
d) The membership with the TPA is used for availing cashless facility as well 
as processing of claims when the member requires the support of the 
policy for a hospitalization or treatment that is covered. 

e) TPA processes the claim or cashless request and provides the services 
within the time agreed with the insurer. 

The cut-off point from which the role of a TPA begins is the moment of 
allocation of the policy in the name of the TPA as the servicing entity. The 
servicing requirement continues through the policy period and through any 
further period that is allowed under the policy for reporting a claim. 

When thousands of policies are serviced, this activity is continuous, especially 
when the same policy is renewed and the same TPA is servicing the policy. 

3. Objectives of third party administration (TPA) 

The concept of Third Party Administration in health insurance can be said to 
have been created with the following objectives: 

a) To facilitate service to a customer of health insurance in all possible 
manners at the time of need. 

b) To organise cashless treatment for the insured patient at network 
hospitals. 

c) To provide fair and fast settlement of claims to the customers based on 
the claim documents submitted and as per procedure and guidelines of 
the insurance company. 

d) To create functional expertise in handling health insurance claims and 
related services. 

e) To respond to customers in a timely and proper manner. 

f) To create an environment where the market objective of an insured 
person being able to access quality healthcare at a reasonable cost is 
achieved and 

g) To help generate/collate relevant data pertaining to morbidity, costs, 
procedures, length of stay etc., 

4. Relationship between insurer and TPA 

Many insurers utilize the services of the TPA for post-sale service of health 
insurance policies while few insurers, especially from the life insurance sector 
also seek assistance of a TPA for arranging pre-policy medical check-up service.
466 
The relationship between an insurer and the TPA is contractual with a host of 
requirements and process steps built into the contract. IRDAI Health Insurance 
Standardization guidelines now lay down guidelines and provide a set of 
suggested standard clauses for contract between TPA and insurance company, 

The services that an insurer expects out of the TPA are as follows: 

A. Provider networking services 

The TPA is expected to build a relationship with a network of hospitals across 
the country, with the objective of providing cashless claim payments for health 
claims to the insured persons. The recent guidelines by IRDAI require the 
relationship to be tri-partite including the insurer and not just between the 
TPA and the provider. 

They also negotiate good scheduled rates for various hospitalization procedures 
and packages from such network hospitals reducing costs to insureds and also 
insurers. 

B. Call centre services 

The TPA is usually expected to maintain a call centre with toll-free numbers 
reachable at all times including nights, weekends and holidays i.e. 24*7*365. 
The call centre of the TPA will provide information relating to: 

a) Coverage and benefits available under the policy. 

b) Processes and procedures relating to health claims. 

c) Guidance relating to the services and cashless hospitalization. 

d) Information on network hospitals. 

e) Information on balance sum insured available under the policy. 

f) Information on claim status. 

g) Advice on missing documents in case of claims. 

The call centre should be accessible through a national toll free number and 
the customer service staff should be able to communicate in the major 
languages normally spoken by the customers. These details are of course 
governed by the contract between the insurers and their TPAs.
467 
C. Cashless access services 

Definition 

"Cashless facility" means a facility extended by the insurer to the insured where 
the payments, of the costs of treatment undergone by the insured in 
accordance with the policy terms and conditions, are directly made to the 
network provider by the insurer to the extent pre-authorization approved. 
To provide this service, the requirements of the insurer under the contract are: 

a) All policy related information must be available with the TPA. It is the 
duty of the insurer to provide this to the TPA. 

b) Data of members included in the policy should be available and 
accessible, without any error or deficiency. 

c) The insured persons must carry an Identity Card that relates them to the 
policy and the TPA. This Identity Card must be issued by the TPA in an 
agreed format, reach the member within a reasonable time and should 
be valid throughout the policy period. 

d) TPA must issue a pre-authorization or a Letter of Guarantee to the 
hospital based on the information provided for requesting the cashless 
facility. It could seek more information to understand the nature of 
illness, treatment proposed and the cost involved. 

e) Where the information is not clear or not available, the TPA can reject 
the cashless request, making it clear that denial of cashless facility is 
not to be construed as denial of treatment. The member is also free to 
pay and file a claim later, which will be considered on its merits. 

f) In emergency cases, the intimation should be done within 24 hours of 
admission and the decision on cashless communicated. 

D. Customer relationship and contact management 

The TPA needs to provide a mechanism by which the customers can represent 
their grievances. It is usual for health insurance claims to be subjected to 
scrutiny and verification. It is also noted that a small percentage of the health 
insurance claims are denied which are outside the purview of the policy terms 
and conditions. 

In addition, almost all health insurance claims are subject to deduction on some 
amount of the claim. These deductions cause customer dissatisfaction, 
especially where the reason for the deduction or denial is not properly 
explained to the customer. 

To make sure that such grievances are resolved as quickly as possible, the 
insurer requires the TPA to have an effective grievance solution management.
468 
E. Billing services 

Under billing services, the insurer expects the TPA to provide three functions: 

a) Standardized billing pattern that can help the insurer analyze the use of 
coverage under various heads as well as decide the pricing. 

b) Confirmation that the amount charged is relevant to the treatment 
really required for the illness. 

c) Diagnosis and procedure codes are captured so that standardization of 
data is possible across all TPAs in accordance with national or 
international standards. 

This requires trained and skilled manpower in the TPA who are capable of 
coding, verifying the tariff and standardizing the billing data capture. 

F. Claim processing and payment services 

This is the most critical service offered by the TPAs. Claim processing services 
offered by the TPA to the insurer is usually end-to-end service from registering 
intimation to processing to recommending approval and payment. 

Payment of claims is done through the funds received from the insurer. The 
funds may be provided to the TPA in the form of advance money or may be 
settled directly by the insurer through its bank to the customer or to the 
hospital. 

The TPA is expected to keep an account of the monies and provide periodic 
reconciliation of the amounts received from the insurance company. The 
money cannot be used for any other purpose except for payment of approved 
claims. 

G. Management Information Services 

Since the TPA performs claim processing, all information relating to the claims 
individually or collectively is available with the TPA. The insurer requires the 
data for various purposes and such data must be provided accurately and on a 
timely basis by the TPA. 

Thus the scope of a TPA‟s services can be stated as end-to-end service of the 
health insurance policies issued by the insurers, could be restricted to few 
activities, depending on requirements and MOU with particular insurer. 

H. TPA Remuneration 

For these services, the TPA is paid a fee on one of the following basis: 

a) A percentage of the premium (excluding service tax) charged to the 
customer,
469 

b) A fixed amount for each member serviced by the TPA for a defined time 
period, or 

c) A fixed amount for each transaction of the service provided by the TPA – 
e.g. cost per member card issued, per claim etc. 

Thus through services of TPA, insurers gain access to: 

i. Cashless services 

ii. Data compilation and analysis 

iii. A 24 hour call centre and assistance for the customers 

iv. Network of hospitals and other medical facilities 

v. Support to major group customers 

vi. Facilitation of the claims interaction with the customer 

vii. Negotiation of tariffs and procedure prices with the hospitals 

viii. Technology enabled services to ease customer service 

ix. Verification and investigation of suspect cases 

x. Analysis of claim patterns across companies and provision of crucial 
information on costs, newer methods of treatment, emerging trends and 
in controlling frauds 

xi. Expansion of reach of services quickly
470 
F. Claims management – personal accident 

1. Personal accident 

Definition 

Personal accident is a benefit policy and covers accidental death, accidental 
disability (permanent / partial), Temporary total disability and may also have 
add-on coverage of accidental medical expenses, funeral expenses, educational 
expenses etc. depending on particular product. 

The peril covered under the PA policy is “Accident”. 

Definition 

Accident is defined as anything sudden, unforeseen, unintentional, external, 
violent and by visible means. 

Claims manager should mark caution and check following areas on receipt of the 
notification of the claim: 

a) Person in respect of whom the claim is made is covered under the policy 

b) Policy is valid as on date of loss and premium is received 

c) Loss is within the policy period 

d) Loss has arisen out of “Accident” and not sickness 

e) Check for any fraud triggers and assign investigation if need be 

f) Register the claim and create reserve for the same 

g) Maintain the turnaround time (claim servicing time) and keep the 
customer informed of the development of the claim. 

2. Claims investigation 

If any red alert is noticed in the claim intimation or on receipt of the claim 
documents, claim may be assigned to a professional investigator for verification 
simultaneously. 

Example 

Examples of red alerts for personal accident claims (for purpose of further 
investigation, but does not indicate positive indication of fraud or claim being 
fraudulent):
471 
 Close proximity claims (claim within a short time of start of insurance) 
 High weekly benefit amount with longer period of disability 
 Discrepancy in the claim documents 
 Multiple claims by same insured 
 Indication of alcohol 
 Suspected suicide 
 Late night Road Traffic Accident while vehicle was being driven by 
insured 
 Snake bite 
 Drowning 
 Fall from height 
 Suspected sickness related cases 
 Poisoning 
 Murder 
 Bullet injury 
 Frost bite disappearance 
 Homicide etc. 

The main objectives of investigation are: 

a) Examine the cause of loss. 

b) Ascertain the extent and nature of loss. 

c) Collection of evidence and information. 

d) To ascertain if there is element of fraud or exaggeration of claim 
amount. 

Please note: the objective of investigation is to verify the facts of the case and 
gather necessary evidence. 

It is important that Claims examiner guides the investigator as to the focus of 
investigation. 

Example 

Example of case guideline: 

Road traffic accident 

i. When did the incident take place – exact time and date place? Date and 
time 

ii. Was the insured a pedestrian, traveling as passenger/pillion rider or 
driving the vehicle involved in accident? 

iii. Description on the accident, how did it take place?
472 
iv. Was the insured under the influence of alcohol at the time of accident? 

v. In case of death, what was the exact time and date of death, treatment 
provided before death, at which hospital etc? 

The possible reason for the accident: 

Mechanical failure (steering, brake etc. failure) of the insured‟s or opponent 
vehicle, due to any sickness (heart attack, seizure etc.) of the driver of the 
vehicle, influence of alcohol, bad road condition, weather condition, speed of 
the vehicle etc. 

Some examples of possible fraud and leakage in personal accident claims: 

i. Exaggeration in TTD period. 

ii. Illness presented as accident e.g. backache due to pathological reasons 
converted into a PA claim after reported „fall/slip‟ at home. 

iii. Pre-existing accidents are claimed as fresh, by fabricating documents-
Natural death presented as accidental case or pre-existing morbidity 
leading to death after accident 

iv. Suicidal deaths presented as accidental deaths 

Discharge voucher is an important document for settlement of personal accident 
claim, especially those involving death claims. It is also important to obtain 
nominee details at the time of proposal and the same should form part of policy 
document. 

3. Claim documentation 

Table 2.3 

Death claim 

a) Duly completed Personal Accident claim form signed by 
the claimant‟s nominee/family member 
b) Original or Attested copy of First Information Report. 
(Attested copy of FIR / Panchnama / Inquest Panchnama) 
c) Original or Attested copy of Death certificate. 
d) Attested copy of Post Mortem Report if conducted. 
e) Attested copy of AML documents (Anti-money laundering) 
- for name verification (passport / PAN card / Voter's ID / 
Driving license) for address verification (Telephone bill / 
Bank account statement / Electricity bill / Ration card). 
f) Legal heir certificate containing affidavit and indemnity 
bond both duly signed by all legal heirs and notarized
473 
Permanent 
Total Disability 
(PTD) and 
Permanent 
Partial 
Disability(PPD) 
Claim 
a) Duly completed Personal Accident claim form signed by 
the claimant. 
b) Attested copy of First Information Report if applicable. 
c) Permanent disability certificate from a civil surgeon or 
any equivalent competent doctors certifying the 
disability of the insured. 
Temporary 
Total 
Disability(TTD) 
Claim 

a) Medical certificate from treating doctor mentioning the 
type of disability and disability period. Leave certificate 
from employer giving details of exact leave period, duly 
signed and sealed by the employer. 
b) Fitness certificate from the treating doctor certifying 
that the insured is fit to perform his normal duties. 

The above list is only indicative, further documents (including photographs of 
scar marks, site of accident etc.) may be required depending on particular facts 
of the case, especially the cases with suspected fraud angle to be investigated. 

Test Yourself 4 

Which of the following documents are not required to be submitted for 
Permanent Total Disability claim? 

I. Duly completed Personal Accident claim form signed by the claimant. 
II. Attested copy of First Information Report if applicable. 
III. Permanent disability certificate from a civil surgeon or any equivalent 
competent doctors certifying the disability of the insured. 
IV. Fitness certificate from the treating doctor certifying that the insured is fit 
to perform his normal duties. 

G. Claims management- Overseas travel insurance 

1. Overseas travel insurance policy 

Though Overseas travel insurance policy has many sections covering non-
medical benefits, its underwriting and claims management has traditionally 
been under health insurance portfolio because medical and sickness benefit is 
the main cover under the policy. 

The covers under the policy can be broadly divided into following sections. A 
specific product may cover all or few of the below mentioned benefits: 

a) Medical and sickness section 

b) Repatriation and evacuation 

c) Personal accident cover
474 
d) Personal liability 

e) Other non-medical covers: 

i. 
Trip Cancellation 
ii. 
Trip Delay 
iii. Trip interruption 
iv. Missed Connection 
v. 
Delay of Checked Baggage 
vi. Loss of Checked Baggage 
vii. Loss of Passport 
viii. Emergency Cash Advance 
ix. Hijack Allowance 
x. 
Bail Bond insurance 
xi. Hijack cover 
xii. Sponsor Protection 
xiii. Compassionate Visit 
xiv. Study Interruption 
xv. Home burglary 

As the name suggests, the policy is intended for people travelling abroad, it is 
natural that loss would happen outside India and claims would need to be 
serviced appropriately as and when reported. In case of overseas travel 
insurance the claim servicing usually involves a Third Party service provider 
(Assistance Company) who has established a network for providing necessary 
support and assistance all over the world. 

Claims services essentially include: 

a) Taking down the claim notification 24*7 basis; 
b) Sending the claim form and procedure; 
c) Guiding customer on what to do immediately after loss; 
d) Extending cashless services for medical and sickness claims; 
e) Arranging for repatriation and evacuation, emergency cash advance. 

2. Assistance companies – Role in overseas claims 

Assistance companies have their own offices and tie ups with other similar 
providers world over. These companies offer assistance to the customers of 
insurance companies in case of contingencies covered under the policy. 

These companies operate a 24*7 call centre including international toll free 
numbers for claim registration and information. They also offer the following 
services and charges for the services vary depending on agreement with the 
particular insurance company, benefits covered etc. 

a) 
Medical assistance services: 

i. Medical service provider referrals 
ii. Arrangement of hospital admission
475 
iii. Arrangement of Emergency Medical Evacuation 
iv. Arrangement of Emergency Medical Repatriation 
v. Mortal remains repatriation 
vi. Compassionate visit arrangements 
vii. Minor children assistance/escort 

b) 
Monitoring of Medical Condition during and after hospitalisation 

c) 
Delivery of Essential Medicines 

d) 
Guarantee of Medical Expenses Incurred during hospitalization subject to 
terms and condition of the policy and approval of insurance company. 

e) 
Pre-trip information services and other services: 

i. Visas and inoculation requirements 
ii. Embassy referral services 
iii. Lost passport and lost luggage assistance services 
iv. Emergency message transmission services 
v. Bail bond arrangement 
vi. Financial Emergency Assistance 

f) 
Interpreter Referral 

g) 
Legal Referral 

h) 
Appointment with lawyer 

3. Claims management for cashless medical cases 

Claims management approach differs for cashless medical cases, reimbursement 
medical cases and other non-medical cases. Again, cashless medical claims 
management differs in US than cashless medical in other countries. We shall 
now study step by step process 

a) Claim notification 

As and when loss happens, the patient takes admission into the hospital and 
shows the insurance details to the admission counter. Assistance Company 
receives notification of a new case from hospital and/or from patient or 
relatives/friends. Claim procedure is then explained to the claimant. 

b) Case management steps: 

These may vary from company to company, common steps are listed below: 

i. Assistance Company case manager verifies the benefits, sum insured, 
policy period, name of the policy holder.
476 
ii. Case manager then gets in touch with the hospital to obtain clinical 
/medical notes for an update on the patient‟s medical condition, billing 
information, estimates of cost. Assistance Company receives the clinical 
notes and estimate of medical cost and send an update to the Insurer. 

iii. Admissibility of the claim is determined and Guarantee of payment is 
placed to hospital subject to approval from Insurance Company. 

iv. There can be scenario where investigation may be necessary in India 
(local place of insured) and/or in loss location. Process of investigation is 
similar to what is explained in personal accident claims section. 
Investigator abroad is selected with the help of Assistance Company or 
through direct contact of insurance company. 

v. Assistance Company‟s case manager continues to monitor the case on a 
daily basis to provide Insurer with a clinical and cost update, progress 
notes, etc. in order to obtain authorization for continuation of 
treatment. 

vi. Once the patient is discharged, case manager works diligently with the 
hospital to confirm final charges. 

vii. Assistance Company ensures that the bill is properly scrutinized, 
scrubbed and audited. Any error found is notified to the billing 
department of the hospital for rectification. 

viii. Final bill is then re-priced as per the rates agreed between the provider 
and Assistance Company or its associate reprising agent. The earlier the 
payment assurance made to hospital, better discount through re-pricing 
is possible. 

Re-pricing is typically characteristic of US healthcare and as such, is not 
applicable for non US cases. This is a major difference between cashless 
medical case in US and non-US cases. 

c) Claims processing Steps: 

i. 
The claims assessor receives the re-priced/original bill, verifies and 
ensures that coverage was in place for the dates of service and 
treatment rendered. The bill received by the Assistance Company is 
audited by the claims department to ensure the charges are in line and 
as per the treatment protocol. The discount is re-confirmed and the bill 
is processed. 

ii. 
The bill is then sent to Insurer for payment accompanied by re-pricing 
notification sheet and explanation of benefits (EOB). 

iii. Insurance company receives the bill and authorizes immediate payment 
to Assistance Company.
477 
d) Payment process steps: 

i. 
Assistance Company receives authorization from Insurer to release 
payment to the hospital via local office. 

ii. 
The finance department releases the payment 

e) Hospitalization Procedures 

i. 
The system in overseas countries, especially US and Europe are quite 
different from the hospitals in India since majority of population has 
universal health coverage either through private insurance or through 
government schemes. Most hospitals accept Guarantee of Payments from 
all international insurance companies once the insured provides them 
with a valid health or overseas travel insurance policy. 

In most countries treatment is not delayed for want of confirmation of 
insurance coverage or cash deposit. 

Hospitals start the treatment immediately. If there is insurance cover the 
insurance policy pays or the patient person has to pay. The hospitals tend to 
inflate charges since payments are delayed. 

If payment is immediate, hospitals tend to offer very high discounts for 
immediate payment. Re-pricing agencies generally negotiate with hospitals 
for discounts for early settlement of hospital bills. 

ii. 
Information regarding network hospitals and the procedures is available 
to the insured on the toll free numbers provided by the assistance 
companies. 

iii. In event of the necessity of a hospitalization the insured needs to 
intimate the same at the call centre and proceed to a specified hospital 
with the valid travel insurance policy. 

iv. Hospitals usually contact the assistance companies/insurers on the call 
centre numbers to check the validity of the policy and verify coverage‟s. 

v. 
Once the policy is accepted by the hospital the insured would undergo 
treatment in the hospital on a cashless basis. 

vi. Some basic information required by the insurer/assistance provider to 
determine admissibility are 

1. Details of ailment 

2. In case of any previous history ,details of hospital, local medical 
officer in India:
478 
 Past history, current treatment and further planned course in 
hospital and request for immediate sending of 
 Claim form along with attending physicians statement 
 Passport copy 
 Release of medical information form 

f) Reimbursement of medical expenses and other non-medical claims: 

Reimbursement claims are normally filed by insured after they return to 
India. Upon receipt of the claim papers, claim is processed as per usual 
process. Payments for all admissible claims are made in Indian Rupee (INR), 
unlike in cashless claims where payment is made in foreign currency. 

While processing the reimbursement claims, currency conversion rate is 
applied as on date of loss to arrive at quantum of liability in INR. Then the 
payment is made though cheque or electronic transfer. 

i. Personal accident claims are processed in similar fashion as explained in 
personal accident claims section. 
ii. Bail bond cases and financial emergency cases are paid upfront by 
Assistance Company and later claimed from insurance company. 
iii. Claims repudiation of untenable claims follows the same process as for 
all other claims. 

g) Claim documentation for Medical Accident and Sickness Expenses 

i. Claim form 
ii. Doctor‟s report 
iii. Original Admission/discharge card 
iv. Original Bills/Receipts/Prescription 
v. Original X-ray reports/ Pathological/ Investigative reports 
vi. Copy of passport/Visa with Entry and exit stamp 

The above list is only indicative. Additional information/documents may be 
required depending on specific case details or depending upon claim 
settlement policy/procedure followed by particular insurer. 

Test Yourself 5 

________________ are paid upfront by Assistance Company and later claimed 
from insurance company. 

I. 
Bail bond cases 
II. Personal accident claims 
III. Overseas travel insurance claims 
IV. Untenable claims
479 

Summary 

a) Insurance is a „promise‟ and the policy is a „witness‟ to that promise. The 
occurrence of insured event leading to a claim under the policy is the true 
test of that promise. 

b) One of the key rating parameter in insurance is the claims paying ability of 
the insurance company. 

c) Customers, who buys insurance is the primary stakeholder as well as the 
receiver of the claim. 

d) In Cashless claim a network hospital provides the medical services based on 
a pre-approval from the insurer / TPA and later submits the documents for 
settlement of the claim. 

e) In reimbursement claim, the customer pays the hospital from his own 
resources and then files claim with Insurer / TPA for payment. 

f) Claim intimation is the first instance of contact between the customer and 
the claims team. 

g) If a fraud is suspected by insurance company in case of insurance claim, it is 
sent for investigation. Investigation of a claim could be done in-house by an 
insurer/TPA or be entrusted to a professional investigation agency. 

h) Reserving refers to the amount of provision made for all claims in the books 
of the insurer based on the status of the claims. 

i) In case of a denial, the customer has the option, apart from the 
representation to the insurer, to approach the Insurance Ombudsman or the 
consumer forums or even the legal authorities. 

j) Frauds occur mostly in hospitalization indemnity policies but Personal 
accident policies also are used to make fraud claims. 

k) The TPA provides many important services to the insurer and gets 
remunerated in the form of fees.
480 
Self-Examination Questions 

Question 1 

Who among the following is considered as primary stakeholder in insurance 
claim process? 
I. Customers 
II. Owners 
III. Underwriters 
IV. Insurance agents/brokers 

Question 2 

Girish Saxena‟s insurance claim was denied by insurance company. In case of a 
denial, what is the option available to Girish Saxena, apart from the 
representation to the insurer? 

I. To approach Government 
II. To approach legal authorities 
III. To approach insurance agent 
IV. Nothing could be done in case of case denial 

Question 3 

During investigation, of a health insurance claim presented by Rajiv Mehto, 
insurance company finds that instead of Rajiv Mehto, his brother Rajesh Mehto 
had been admitted to hospital for treatment. The policy of Rajiv Mehto is not a 
family floater plan. This is an example of ___________fraud. 

I. Impersonation 
II. Fabrication of documents 
III. Exaggeration of expenses 
IV. Outpatient treatment converted to in-patient / hospitalization 

Question 4 

Under which of the following condition, is domiciliary hospitalization is covered 
in a health insurance policy? 

I. The condition of the patient is such that he/she can be removed to the 
Hospital/Nursing Home , but prefer not to 
II. The patient cannot be removed to Hospital/Nursing Home for lack of 
accommodation therein 
III. The treatment can be carried out only in hospital/Nursing home 
IV. Duration of hospitalization is exceeding 24 hours
481 

Question 5 

Which of the following codes capture the procedures performed to treat the 
illness? 

I. ICD 
II. DCI 
III. CPT 
IV. PCT 

Answers to Self-Examination Questions 

Answer 1 

The correct option is I. 

Customers are primary stakeholder in insurance claim process 

Answer 2 

The correct answer is II. 

In case of insurance claim denial, individuals can approach legal authorities. 

Answer 3 

The correct option is I. 

This is an example of impersonation, as the person insured is different from 
person treated. 

Answer 4 

The correct answer is II. 

Domiciliary treatment is provided in health insurance policy, only when the 
patient 
cannot 
be 
removed 
to 
Hospital/Nursing 
Home 
for 
lack 
of 
accommodation therein 

Answer 5 

The correct option is III. 
Current Procedure Terminology (CPT) codes capture the procedures performed 
to treat the illness.