The Illinois Legislature created the Illinois Insurance Exchange, a cooperative effort of individual 
brokers and risk bearers operating as a single market, similar to Lloyd’s of London. 
1985 
Mission Insurance Group failed. The insolvency incurred the largest payout by state guaranty 
funds for a single property/casualty insurance company failure at that time. This and other 
insolvencies in the 1980s led to stricter state regulation of insurer solvency.
192 I.I.I. Insurance Handbook www.iii.org/insurancehandbook 
Alphabetical Index
Brief History
YEAR 
EVENT

Montana became the first state to forbid discrimination by sex in the setting of insurance rates. 
1992 
European Union’s Third Nonlife Insurance Directive became effective, establishing a single 
European market for insurance. 
1996 
Florida enacted rules requiring insurers to offer separate deductibles for hurricane losses, marking 
a shift to hurricane deductibles based on a percentage of loss rather than a set dollar figure. 
 Catastrophe bonds, vehicles for covering disaster risk in the capital markets, were introduced.
1997 
World Trade Organization agreement to dismantle barriers to trade in financial services, including 
insurance, banking and securities, was signed by the United States and some 100 other countries. 
1999 
Financial Services Modernization Act (Gramm-Leach-Bliley) enacted, allowing insurers, banks and 
securities firms to affiliate under a financial holding company structure.
2001 
Terrorist attacks upon the World Trade Center in New York City and the Pentagon in 
Washington, D.C. caused about $40 billion in insured losses.

New York became the first state to ban the use of hand-held cell phones while driving.
2002 
Terrorism Risk Insurance Act enacted to provide a temporary federal backstop for terrorism 
insurance losses. 
2003 
In a landmark ruling, upheld in 2004, the U.S. Supreme Court placed limits on punitive damages, 
holding in State Farm v. Campbell that punitive damages awards should generally not exceed 
nine times compensatory awards.
2004 
New York Attorney General Eliot Spitzer and a number of state regulators launched investigations 
into insurance industry sales and accounting practices.
2005 
Citigroup sold off its Travelers life insurance unit, following the spin off of its property/casualty 
business in 2002. This dissolved the arrangement that led to the passage of Gramm-Leach-Bliley 
in 1999.