i 
IC-38 
INSURANCE AGENTS 
LIFE 

ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 

This course is based on revised syllabus prepared by Insurance Institute of 
India, Mumbai 

G – Block, Plot No. C-46, 
Bandra Kurla Complex, Bandra (E), Mumbai – 400 051.
ii 
INSURANCE AGENTS - LIFE 
IC-38 

Year of Edition: 2016 

This course is the copyright of the Insurance Institute of India, Mumbai. In no 
circumstances may any part of the course be reproduced. 
This course is purely meant for the purpose of study of the subject by 
student appearing for the examination of Insurance Institute of India & is 
based on prevailing best industry practices. It is not intended to give 
interpretation or solution in case of dispute or matters involving legal 
argument. 
This is only an indicative study material. Please note that the questions 
in the examination shall not be confined to this study material. 

Published by: P. Venugopal, Secretary-General, Insurance Institute of India, G- 
Block, Plot C-46, Bandra Kurla Complex, Bandra (E) Mumbai – 400 051.
iii 

PREFACE 

The Institute has developed the course material for Insurance Agents Life 
Branch in consultation with the industry. The course material is prepared based 
on the syllabus approved by IRDAI. 

The study course, thus, provides basic knowledge of Life, General and Health 
insurance that enables agents to understand and appreciate their professional 
career in the right perspective. Needless to say, insurance business operates in 
a dynamic environment the agents will have to keep abreast of changes in law 
and practice, through personal study and participation in in-house training given 
by insurers. 

We thank IRDAI for entrusting this work to III. The Institute wishes all those who 
study this course and pass the examination. 

Insurance Institute of India
iv 
CONTENTS 

Chapter no. 
Title 
Page no. 
SECTION 1 
COMMON CHAPTERS 
1 
Introduction to Insurance 
2 
2 
Customer Service 
27 
3 
Grievance Redressal Mechanism 
59 
4 
Regulatory aspects of Insurance Agents 
70 
5 
Legal Principle of an Insurance Contract 
79 
SECTION 2 
LIFE INSURANCE 
6 
What Life Insurance Involves 
101 
7 
Financial Planning 
115 
8 
Life Insurance Products – I 
136 
9 
Life Insurance Products – II 
156 
10 
Applications of Life Insurance 
172 
11 
Pricing and Valuation in Life Insurance 
182 
12 
Documentation – Proposal Stage 
205 
13 
Documentation – Policy Condition - I 
237 
14 
Documentation - Policy Condition - II 
246 
15 
Underwriting 
267 
16 
Payments Under a Life Insurance Policy 
289 
SECTION 3 
HEALTH INSURANCE 
17 
Introduction to Health Insurance 
303 
18 
Insurance Documentation 
319 
19 
Health Insurance Products 
344 
20 
Health Insurance Underwriting 
399 
21 
Health Insurance Claims 
436
1 

SECTION 1 

COMMON CHAPTERS
2 
CHAPTER 1 

INTRODUCTION TO INSURANCE 

Chapter Introduction 

This chapter aims to introduce the basics of insurance, trace its evolution and 
how it works. You will also learn how insurance provides protection against 
economic losses arising as a result of unforeseen events and serves as an 
instrument of risk transfer. 

Learning Outcomes 

A. Life insurance – History and evolution 
B. How insurance works 
C. Risk management techniques 
D. Insurance as a tool for managing risk 
E. Role of insurance in society
3 
A. Life insurance – History and evolution 

We live in a world of uncertainty. We hear about: 

 trains colliding; 
 floods destroying entire communities; 
 earthquakes that bring grief; 
 young people dying suddenly pre-maturely 

Diagram 1: Events happening around us 

Why do these events make us anxious and afraid? 

The reason is simple. 

i. 
Firstly these events are unpredictable. If we can anticipate and predict 
an event, we can prepare for it. 

ii. Secondly, such unpredictable and untoward events are often a cause of 
economic loss and grief. 

A community can come to the aid of individuals who are affected by such 
events, by having a system of sharing and mutual support.
4 
The idea of insurance took birth thousands of years ago. Yet, the business of 
insurance, as we know it today, goes back to just two or three centuries. 

1. History of insurance 

Insurance has been known to exist in some form or other since 3000 BC. Various 
civilisations, over the years, have practiced the concept of pooling and sharing 
among themselves, all the losses suffered by some members of the community. 
Let us take a look at some of the ways in which this concept was applied. 

2. Insurance through the ages 

Babylonian Traders 
The Babylonian traders had agreements where they 
would pay additional sums to lenders, as a price for 
writing off of their loans, in case a shipment was lost or 
stolen. These were called „bottomry loans‟. Under these 
agreements, the loan taken against the security of the 
ship or its goods had to be repaid only if and when the 
ship arrived safely, after the voyage, at its destination. 
Traders 
from 
Bharuch and Surat 
Practices similar to Babylonian traders were prevalent 
among traders from Bharuch and Surat, sailing in Indian 
ships to Sri Lanka, Egypt and Greece. 
Greeks 
The Greeks had started benevolent societies in the late 
7th century AD, to take care of the funeral – and families 
– of members who died. The Friendly Societies of 
England were similarly constituted. 
Inhabitants 
of 
Rhodes 
The inhabitants of Rhodes adopted a practice whereby, 
if some goods were lost due to jettisoning1 during 
distress, the owners of goods (even those who lost 
nothing) would bear the losses in some proportion. 
Chinese Traders 
Chinese traders in ancient days would keep their goods 
in different boats or ships sailing over the treacherous 
rivers. They assumed that even if any of the boats 
suffered such a fate, the loss of goods would be only 
partial and not total. The loss could be distributed and 
thereby reduced. 

3. Modern concepts of insurance 

In India the principle of life insurance was reflected in the institution of the 
joint-family system in India, which was one of the best forms of life insurance 
down the ages. Sorrows and losses were shared by various family members in 
the event of the unfortunate demise of a member, as a result of which each 
member of the family continued to feel secure. 

The break-up of the joint family system and emergence of the nuclear 
family in the modern era, coupled with the stress of daily life has made it 

1Jettisoning means throwing away some of the cargo to reduce weight of the ship and restore balance
5 
necessary to evolve alternative systems for security. This highlights the 
importance of life insurance to an individual. 

i. 
Lloyds: The origins of modern commercial insurance business as 
practiced today can be traced to Lloyd‟s Coffee House in London. 
Traders, who used to gather there, would agree to share the losses, to 
their goods being carried by ships, due to perils of the sea. Such losses 
used to occur because of maritime perils, such as pirates robbing on the 
high seas, or bad sea weather spoiling the goods or sinking of the ship 
due to perils of the sea. 
ii. Amicable Society for a Perpetual Assurance founded in 1706 in London 
is considered to be the first life insurance company in the world. 

4. History of insurance in India 

a) India: Modern insurance in India began in early 1800 or thereabouts, with 
agencies of foreign insurers starting marine insurance business. 

The 
Oriental 
Life 
Insurance Co. Ltd 
The first life insurance company to be set up 
in India was an English company 
Triton Insurance Co. Ltd. 
The first non-life insurer to be established in 
India 
Bombay Mutual Assurance 
Society Ltd. 
The first Indian insurance company. It was 
formed in 1870 in Mumbai 
National 
Insurance 
Company Ltd. 
The oldest insurance company in India. It was 
founded in 1906 and it is still in business. 

Many other Indian companies were set up subsequently as a result of the 
Swadeshi movement at the turn of the century. 

Important 

In 1912, the Life Insurance Companies Act and the Provident Fund Act were 
passed to regulate the insurance business. The Life Insurance Companies Act, 
1912 made it compulsory that premium-rate tables and periodical valuation of 
companies be certified by an actuary. However, the disparity and discrimination 
between Indian and foreign companies continued. 

The Insurance Act 1938 was the first legislation enacted to regulate the 
conduct of insurance companies in India. This Act, as amended from time 
to time continues to be in force. The Controller of Insurance was 
appointed by the Government under the provisions of the Insurance Act. 

b) Nationalisation of life insurance: Life insurance business was nationalised 
on 1st September 1956 and the Life Insurance Corporation of India (LIC) 
was formed. There were 170 companies and 75 provident fund societies 
doing life insurance business in India at that time. From 1956 to 1999, the 
LIC held exclusive rights to do life insurance business in India.
6 
c) Nationalisation of non-life insurance: With the enactment of General 
Insurance Business Nationalisation Act (GIBNA) in 1972, the non-life 
insurance business was also nationalised and the General Insurance 
Corporation of India (GIC) and its four subsidiaries were set up. At that 
point of time, 106 insurers in India doing non-life insurance business were 
amalgamated with the formation of four subsidiaries of the GIC of India. 

d) Malhotra Committee and IRDAI: In 1993, the Malhotra Committee was setup 
to explore and recommend changes for development of the industry 
including the reintroduction of an element of competition. The Committee 
submitted its report in 1994.In 1997 the Insurance Regulatory Authority (IRA) 
was established. The passing of the Insurance Regulatory& Development Act, 
1999(IRDAI) led to the formation of Insurance Regulatory and Development 
Authority of India (IRDAI) in April 2000 as a statutory regulatory body both 
for life, non-life and health insurance industry. IRDA has been 
subsequently renamed as IRDAI in 2014. 

Amending the Insurance Act in 2015, certain stipulations have been 
added governing the definition and formation of insurance companies 
in India. 

An Indian Insurance company includes a company „in which the 
aggregate holdings of equity shares by foreign investors, 
including portfolio investors, do not exceed forty-nine percent of 
the paid up equity capital of such Indian insurance company, 
which is Indian owned and controlled, in such manner as may be 
prescribed‟. 

Amendment to the Insurance Act also stipulates about foreign 
companies in India, A foreign insurance company can engage in 
reinsurance through a branch established in India. The term "re-
insurance" means the „insurance of part of one insurer's risk by 
another insurer who accepts the risk for a mutually acceptable 
premium‟ 

5. Life insurance industry today 

Currently, there are 24 life insurance companies operating in India as detailed 
hereunder: 

a) Life Insurance Corporation (LIC) of India is a public sector company 
b) There are 23 life insurance companies in the private sector
7 
Alphabetical List of 23 Life-Assurance Companies, in the Private-Sector, is as 
follows: 

S.No. Company 
1 AEGON Life Insurance Company Limited 
2 Aviva Life Insurance Company India Limited 
3 Bajaj Allianz Life Insurance Company Limited 
4 Bharti AXA Life Insurance Company Limited 
5 Birla Sun Life Insurance Company Limited 
6 
Canara H.S.B.C. Oriental Bank of Commerce Life Insurance Company 
Limited 
7 D.H.F.L. Pramerica Life Insurance Company Limited 
8 Edelweiss Tokio Life Insurance Company Limited 
9 Exide Life Insurance Company Limited 
10 Future Generali India Life Insurance Company Limited 
11 H.D.F.C. Standard Life Insurance Company Limited 
12 I.C.I.C.I. Prudential Life Insurance Company Limited 
13 I.D.B.I. Federal Life Insurance Company Limited 
14 IndiaFirst Life Insurance Company Limited 
15 Kotak Mahindra Old Mutual Life Insurance Company Limited 
16 Max Life Insurance Company Limited 
17 P.N.B. Metlife India Insurance Company Limited 
18 Reliance Nippon Life Insurance Company Limited 
19 Sahara India Life Insurance Company Limited
8 
20 S.B.I. Life Insurance Company Limited 
21 Shriram Life Insurance Company Limited 
22 Star Union Dai-ichi Life Insurance Company Limited 
23 Tata A.I.A. Life Insurance Company Limited 

c) The postal department, under the Government of India, also transacts 
life insurance business via Postal Life Insurance, but is exempt from the 
purview of the regulator 

Test Yourself 1 

Which among the following is the regulator for the insurance industry in India? 

I. Insurance Authority of India 
II. Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority of India 
III. Life Insurance Corporation of India 
IV. General Insurance Corporation of India
9 
B. How insurance works 

Modern commerce was founded on the principle of ownership of property. When 
an asset loses value (by loss or destruction) due to a certain event, the owner of 
the asset suffers an economic loss. However if a common fund is created, which 
is made up of small contributions from many such owners of similar assets, this 
amount could be used to compensate the loss suffered by the unfortunate few. 

In simple words, the chance of suffering a certain economic loss and its 
consequence could be transferred from one individual to many through the 
mechanism of insurance. 

Definition 

Insurance may thus be considered as a process by which the losses of a few, 
who are unfortunate to suffer such losses, are shared amongst those exposed to 
similar uncertain events / situations. 

Diagram 2: How insurance works 

There is however a catch here. 

i. 
Would people agree to part with their hard earned money, to create 
such a common fund? 

ii. How could they trust that their contributions are actually being used for 
the desired purpose? 

iii. How would they know if they are paying too much or too little? 

Obviously someone has to initiate and organise the process and bring members 
of the community together for this purpose. That „someone‟ is known as an 
„Insurer‟ who determines the contribution that each individual must make to 
the pool and arranges to pay to those who suffer the loss.
10 

The insurer must also win the trust of the individuals and the community. 

1. How insurance works 

a) Firstly, these must be an asset which has an economic value. The ASSET: 
i. 
May be physical (like a car or a building) or 
ii. May be non-physical (like name and goodwill) or 
iii. May be personal (like one‟s eyes, limbs and other aspects of one‟s 
body) 

b) The asset may lose its value if a certain event happens. This chance of 
loss is called as risk. The cause of the risk event is known as peril. 

c) There is a principle known as pooling. This consists of collecting 
numerous individual contributions (known as premiums) from various 
persons. These persons have similar assets which are exposed to similar 
risks. 

d) This pool of funds is used to compensate the few who might suffer the 
losses as caused by a peril. 

e) This process of pooling funds and compensating the unlucky few is 
carried out through an institution known as the insurer. 

f) The insurer enters into an insurance contract with each person who 
seeks to participate in the scheme. Such a participant is known as 
insured. 

2. Insurance reduces burdens 

Burden of risk refers to the costs, losses and disabilities one has to bear as a 
result of being exposed to a given loss situation/event. 

Diagram 3: Risk burdens that one carries 

There are two types of risk burdens that one carries – primary and secondary. 

a) Primary burden of risk 

The primary burden of risk consists of losses that are actually suffered by 
households (and business units), as a result of pure risk events. These losses 
are often direct and measurable and can be easily compensated for by 
insurance.
11 

Example 

When a factory gets destroyed by fire, the actual value of goods damaged or 
destroyed can be estimated and the compensation can be paid to the one 
who suffers such loss. 

If an individual undergoes a heart surgery, the medical cost of the same is 
known and compensated. 

In addition there may be some indirect losses. 

Example 

A fire may interrupt business operations and lead to loss of profits which 
also can be estimated and the compensation can be paid to the one who 
suffers such a loss. 

b) Secondary burden of risk 

Suppose no such event occurs and there is no loss. Does it mean that those 
who are exposed to the peril carry no burden? The answer is that apart from 
the primary burden, one also carries a secondary burden of risk. 

The secondary burden of risk consists of costs and strains that one has to 
bear merely from the fact that one is exposed to a loss situation. Even if the 
said event does not occur, these burdens have still to be borne. 

Let us understand some of these burdens: 

i. 
Firstly there is physical and mental strain caused by fear and anxiety. 
The anxiety may vary from person to person but it is present and can 
cause stress and affect a person‟s wellbeing. 

ii. Secondly when one is uncertain about whether a loss would occur or 
not, the prudent thing to do would be to set aside a reserve fund to 
meet such an eventuality. There is a cost involved in keeping such a 
fund. For instance, such funds may be held in a liquid form and yield low 
returns. 

By transferring the risk to an insurer, it becomes possible to enjoy peace of 
mind, invest funds that would otherwise have been set aside as a reserve, and 
plan one‟s business more effectively. It is precisely for these reasons that 
insurance is needed.
12 
Test Yourself 2 

Which among the following is a secondary burden of risk? 

I. Business interruption cost 
II. Goods damaged cost 
III. Setting aside reserves as a provision for meeting potential losses in the 
future 
IV. Hospitalisation costs as a result of heart attack
13 
C. Risk management techniques 

Another question one may ask is whether insurance is the right solution to all 
kinds of risk situations. The answer is „No‟. 

Insurance is only one of the methods by which individuals may seek to manage 
their risks. Here they transfer the risks they face to an insurance company. 
However there are some other methods of dealing with risks, which are 
explained below: 

1. Risk avoidance 

Controlling risk by avoiding a loss situation is known as risk avoidance. Thus one 
may try to avoid any property, person or activity with which an exposure may 
be associated. 

Example 

i. 
One may refuse to bear certain manufacturing risks by contracting out the 
manufacturing to someone else. 

ii. One may not venture outside the house for fear of meeting with an accident 
or may not travel at all for fear of falling ill when abroad. 

But risk avoidance is a negative way to handle risk. Individual and social 
advancements come from activities that need some risks to be taken. By 
avoiding such activities, individuals and society would lose the benefits that 
such risk taking activities can provide. 

2. Risk retention 

One tries to manage the impact of risk and decides to bear the risk and its 
effects by oneself. This is known as self-insurance. 

Example 

A business house may decide, based on experience about its capacity to bear 
small losses up to a certain limit, to retain the risk with itself. 

3. Risk reduction and control 

This is a more practical and relevant approach than risk avoidance. It means 
taking steps to lower the chance of occurrence of a loss and/or to reduce 
severity of its impact if such loss should occur.
14 
Important 

The measures to reduce chance of occurrence are known as „Loss Prevention‟. 
The measures to reduce degree of loss are called „Loss Reduction‟. 

Risk reduction involves reducing the frequency and/or sizes of losses through 
one or more of: 

a) Education and training, such as holding regular “fire drills” for 
employees, or ensuring adequate training of drivers, forklift operators, 
wearing of helmets and seat belts and so on. 

One example of this can be educating school going children to avoid junk 
food. 

b) Making 
Environmental 
changes, 
such 
as 
improving 
“physical” 
conditions, e.g. better locks on doors, bars or shutters on windows, 
installing burglar or fire alarms or extinguishers. The State can take 
measures to curb pollution and noise levels to improve the health status 
of its people. Regular spraying of Malaria medicine helps in prevention of 
outbreak of the disease. 

c) Changes made in dangerous or hazardous operations, while using 
machinery and equipment or in the performance of other tasks 

For example leading a healthy lifestyle and eating properly at the right 
time helps in reducing the incidence of falling ill. 

d) Separation, spreading out various items of property into varied locations 
rather than concentrating them at one location, is a method to control 
risks. The idea is, if a mishap were to occur in one location, its impact 
could be reduced by not keeping everything at that one place. 

For instance one could reduce the loss of inventory by storing it in 
different warehouses. Even if one of these were to be destroyed, the 
impact would be reduced considerably. 

4. Risk financing 

This refers to the provision of funds to meet losses that may occur. 

a) Risk retention through self-financing involves self-payment for any losses 
as they occur. In this process the firm assumes and finances its own risk, 
either through its own or borrowed funds, this is known as self-insurance. 
The firm may also engage in various risk reduction methods to make the loss 
impact small enough to be retained by the firm.
15 
b) Risk transfer is an alternative to risk retention. Risk transfer involves 
transferring the responsibility for losses to another party. Here the losses 
that may arise as a result of a fortuitous event (or peril) are transferred to 
another entity. 

Insurance is one of the major forms of risk transfer, and it permits 
uncertainty to be replaced by certainty through insurance indemnity. 

Insurance vs Assurance 

Both insurance and assurance are financial products offered by companies 
operating commercially. Of late the distinction between the two has 
increasingly become blurred and the two are taken as somewhat similar. 
However there are subtle differences between the two as discussed 
hereunder. 

Insurance refers to protection against an event that might happen whereas 
assurance refers to protection against an event that will happen. Insurance 
provides cover against a risk while assurance covers an event that is definite 
e.g. death, which is certain, only the time of occurrence is uncertain. Assurance 
policies are associated with life cover. 

Diagram 4: How insurance indemnifies the insured
16 
There are other ways to transfer risk. For example when a firm is part of a 
group, the risk may be transferred to the parent group which would then 
finance the losses. 

Thus, insurance is only one of the methods of risk transfer. 

Test Yourself 3 

Which among the following is a method of risk transfer? 

I. Bank FD 
II. Insurance 
III. Equity shares 
IV. Real estate
17 
D. Insurance as a tool for managing risk 

When we speak about a risk, we are not referring to a loss that has actually 
been suffered but a loss that is likely to occur. It is thus an expected loss. The 
cost of this expected loss (which is the same as the cost of the risk) is the 
product of two factors: 

i. 
The probability that the peril being insured against may happen, leading 
to the loss 

ii. The impact or the amount of loss that may be suffered as a result 

The cost of risk would increase in direct proportion with both probability and 
amount of loss. However, if the amount of loss is very high, and the probability 
of its occurrence is small, the cost of the risk would be low. 

Diagram 5: Considerations before opting for insurance 

1. Considerations before opting for Insurance 

When deciding whether to insure or not, one needs to weigh the cost of 
transferring the risk against the cost of bearing the loss, that may arise, 
oneself. The cost of transferring the risk is the insurance premium – it is given 
by two factors mentioned in the previous paragraph. The best situations for 
insurance would be where the probability is very low but the loss impact could 
be very high. In such instances, the cost of transferring the risk through its 
insurance (the premium) would be much lower while the cost of bearing it on 
oneself would be very high. 

a) Don‘t risk a lot for a little: A reasonable relationship must be there 
between the cost of transferring the risk and the value derived. 

Example 

Would it make sense to insure an ordinary ball pen? 

b) Don‘t risk more than you can afford to lose: If the loss that can arise as 
a result of an event is so large that it can lead to a situation that is near
18 
bankruptcy, retention of the risk would not appear to be realistic and 
appropriate. 

Example 

What would happen if a large oil refinery were to be destroyed or damaged? 
Could a company afford to bear the loss? 

c) Consider the likely outcomes of the risk carefully: It is best to insure 
those assets for which the probability of occurrence (frequency) of a loss 
is low but the possible severity (impact), is high. 

Example 

Could one afford to not insure a space satellite? 

Test Yourself 4 

Which among the following scenarios warrants insurance? 

I. The sole bread winner of a family might die untimely 
II. A person may lose his wallet 
III. Stock prices may fall drastically 
IV. A house may lose value due to natural wear and tear
19 
E. Role of insurance in society 

Insurance companies play an important role in a country‟s economic 
development. They are contributing in a significant sense to ensuring that the 
wealth of the country is protected and preserved. Some of their contributions 
are given below. 

a) Their investments benefit the society at large. An insurance company‟s 
strength lies in the fact that huge amounts are collected and pooled 
together in the form of premiums. 

b) These funds are collected and held for the benefit of the policyholders. 
Insurance companies are required to keep this aspect in mind and make 
all their decisions in dealing with these funds so as to be in ways that 
benefit the community. This applies also to its investments. That is why 
successful insurance companies would not be found investing in 
speculative ventures i.e. stocks and shares. 

c) The system of insurance provides numerous direct and indirect benefits 
to the individual, his family, to industry and commerce and to the 
community and the nation as a whole. The insured - both individuals and 
enterprises - are directly benefitted because they are protected from 
the consequences of the loss that may be caused by an accident or 
fortuitous event. Insurance, thus, in a sense protects the capital in 
industry and releases the capital for further expansion and development 
of business and industry. 

d) Insurance removes the fear, worry and anxiety associated with one‟s 
future and thus encourages free investment of capital in business 
enterprises and promotes efficient use of existing resources. Thus 
insurance encourages commercial and industrial development along with 
generation of employment opportunities, thereby contributing to a 
healthy economy and increased national productivity. 

e) A bank or financial institution may not advance loans on property unless 
it is insured against loss or damage by insurable perils. Most of them 
insist on assigning the policy as collateral security. 

f) Before acceptance of a risk, insurers arrange survey and inspection of 
the property to be insured, by qualified engineers and other experts. 
They not only assesses the risk for rating purposes but also suggest and 
recommend to the insured, various improvements in the risk, which will 
attract lower rates of premium. 

g) Insurance ranks with export trade, shipping and banking services as an 
earner of foreign exchange to the country. Indian insurers operate in 
more than 30 countries. These operations earn foreign exchange and 
represent invisible exports.
20 
h) Insurers are closely associated with several agencies and institutions 
engaged in fire loss prevention, cargo loss prevention, industrial safety 
and road safety. 

Information 

Insurance and Social Security 

a) It is now recognised that provision of social security is an obligation of the 
State. Various laws, passed by the State for this purpose involve use of 
insurance, compulsory or voluntary, as a tool of social security. Central and 
State Governments contribute premiums under certain social security 
schemes thus fulfilling their social commitments. The Employees State 
Insurance Act, 1948 provides for Employees State Insurance Corporation to 
pay for the expenses of sickness, disablement, maternity and death for the 
benefit of industrial employees and their families, who are insured persons. 
The scheme operates in certain industrial areas as notified by the 
Government. 
b) Insurers play an important role in social security schemes sponsored by the 
Government such as 
1. RKBY – Rashtriya Krishi Bima Yojana 
2. RSBY – Rashtriya Swasthya Bima Yojana 
3. PMJBY – Pradhan Mantri Jeevan Jyoti Bima Yojana 
4. PMSBY – Pradhan Mantri Suraksha Bima Yojana 
 All these benefit the community in general. 

c) All the rural insurance schemes, operated on a commercial basis, are 
designed ultimately to provide social security to the rural families. 

d) Apart from this support to Government schemes, the insurance industry 
itself offers on a commercial basis, insurance covers which have the 
ultimate objective of social security. Examples are: Janata Personal 
Accident, Jan Arogya etc. 

Test Yourself 5 

Which of the below insurance scheme is run by an insurer and not sponsored by 
the Government? 

I. Employees State Insurance Corporation 
II. Crop Insurance Scheme 
III. Jan Arogya 
IV. All of the above
21 

Summary 

 
Insurance is risk transfer through risk pooling. 

 
The origin of commercial insurance business as practiced today is traced to 
the Lloyd‟s Coffee House in London. 

 
An insurance arrangement involves the following entities like: 

 Asset, 
 Risk, 
 Peril, 
 Contract, 
 Insurer and 
 Insured 

 
When persons having similar assets exposed to similar risks contribute into a 
common pool of funds it is known as pooling. 

 
Apart from insurance, other risk management techniques include: 

 Risk avoidance, 
 Risk control, 
 Risk retention, 
 Risk financing and 
 Risk transfer 

 
The thumb rules of insurance are: 

 Don‟t risk more than you can afford to lose, 
 Consider the likely outcomes of the risk carefully and 
 Don‟t risk a lot for a little 

Key Terms 

1. Risk 
2. Pooling 
3. Asset 
4. Burden of risk 
5. Risk avoidance 
6. Risk control 
7. Risk retention 
8. Risk financing 
9. Risk transfer
22 
Answers to Test Yourself 

Answer 1 

The correct option is II. 

Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority of India is the regulator for the 
insurance industry in India. 

Answer 2 

The correct option is III. 

The need for setting aside reserves as a provision for potential losses in the 
future is a secondary burden of risk. 

Answer 3 

The correct option is II. 

Insurance is a method of risk transfer. 

Answer 4 

The correct option is I. 

The bread winner of a family might die untimely leaving the entire family to 
fend for itself, such a scenario warrants purchasing of life insurance. 

Answer 5 

The correct option is III. 

The Jan Arogya insurance scheme is run by an insurer and not sponsored by the 
Government. 

Self-Examination Questions 

Question 1 

Risk transfer through risk pooling is called ________. 

I. Savings 
II. Investments 
III. Insurance 
IV. Risk mitigation
23 
Question 2 

The measures to reduce chances of occurrence of risk are known as _____. 

I. Risk retention 
II. Loss prevention 
III. Risk transfer 
IV. Risk avoidance 

Question 3 

By transferring risk to insurer, it becomes possible ___________. 

I. To become careless about our assets 
II. To make money from insurance in the event of a loss 
III. To ignore the potential risks facing our assets 
IV. To enjoy peace of mind and plan one‟s business more effectively 

Question 4 

Origins of modern insurance business can be traced to __________. 

I. Bottomry 
II. Lloyds 
III. Rhodes 
IV. Malhotra Committee 

Question 5 

In insurance context „risk retention‟ indicates a situation where _____. 

I. Possibility of loss or damage is not there 
II. Loss producing event has no value 
III. Property is covered by insurance 
IV. One decides to bear the risk and its effects 

Question 6 

Which of the following statement is true? 

I. Insurance protects the asset 
II. Insurance prevents its loss 
III. Insurance reduces possibilities of loss 
IV. Insurance pays when there is loss of asset
24 
Question 7 

Out of 400 houses, each valued at Rs. 20,000, on an average 4 houses get burnt 
every year resulting in a combined loss of Rs. 80,000. What should be the annual 
contribution of each house owner to make good this loss? 

I. Rs.100/- 
II. Rs.200/- 
III. Rs.80/- 
IV. Rs.400/- 

Question 8 

Which of the following statements is true? 

I. Insurance is a method of sharing the losses of a „few‟ by „many‟ 
II. Insurance is a method of transferring the risk of an individual to another 
individual 
III. Insurance is a method of sharing the losses of a „many‟ by a few 
IV. Insurance is a method of transferring the gains of a few to the many 

Question 9 

Why do insurers arrange for survey and inspection of the property before 
acceptance of a risk? 

I. To assess the risk for rating purposes 
II. To find out how the insured purchased the property 
III. To find out whether other insurers have also inspected the property 
IV. To find out whether neighbouring property also can be insured 

Question 10 

Which of the below option best describes the process of insurance? 

I. Sharing the losses of many by a few 
II. Sharing the losses of few by many 
III. One sharing the losses of few 
IV. Sharing of losses through subsidy 

Answers to Self-Examination Questions 

Answer 1 

The correct option is III. 

Risk transfer through risk pooling is called insurance.
25 
Answer 2 

The correct option is II. 

The measures to reduce chances of occurrence of risk are known as loss 
prevention measures. 

Answer 3 

The correct option is IV. 

By transferring risk to insurer, it becomes possible to enjoy peace of mind and 
plan one‟s business more effectively. 

Answer 4 

The correct option is II. 

Origins of modern insurance business can be traced to Lloyd‟s.