I. Offer and acceptance 
II. Consideration 
III. Free consent 
IV. Capacity of parties to contract 

Question 2 

_____________ relates to inaccurate statements, which are made without any 
fraudulent intention. 

I. Misrepresentation 
II. Contribution 
III. Offer 
IV. Representation 

Question 3 

________________ involves pressure applied through criminal means. 

I. Fraud 
II. Undue influence 
III. Coercion 
IV. Mistake 

Question 4 

Which among the following is true regarding life insurance contracts?
97 
I. They are verbal contracts not legally enforceable 
II. They are verbal which are legally enforceable 
III. They are contracts between two parties (insurer and insured) as per 
requirements of Indian Contract Act, 1872 
IV. They are similar to wager contracts 

Question 5 

Which of the below is not a valid consideration for a contract? 

I. Money 
II. Property 
III. Bribe 
IV. Jewellery 

Question 6 

Which of the below party is not eligible to enter into a life insurance contract? 

I. Business owner 
II. Minor 
III. House wife 
IV. Government employee 

Question 7 

Which of the below action showcases the principle of “Uberrima Fides”? 

I. Lying about known medical conditions on an insurance proposal form 
II. Not revealing known material facts on an insurance proposal form 
III. Disclosing known material facts on an insurance proposal form 
IV. Paying premium on time 

Question 8 

Which of the below is not correct with regards to insurable interest? 

I. Father taking out insurance policy on his son 
II. Spouses taking out insurance on one another 
III. Friends taking out insurance on one another 
IV. Employer taking out insurance on employees 

Question 9 

When is it essential for insurable interest to be present in case of life insurance? 

I. At the time of taking out insurance 
II. At the time of claim 
III. Insurable interest is not required in case of life insurance 
IV. Either at time of policy purchase or at the time of claim
98 
Question 10 

Find out the proximate cause for death in the following scenario? 

Ajay falls off a horse and breaks his back. He lies there in a pool of water and 
contracts pneumonia. He is admitted to the hospital and dies because of 
pneumonia. 

I. Pneumonia 
II. Broken back 
III. Falling off a horse 
IV. Surgery 

Answers to Self-Examination Questions 

Answer 1 

The correct option is II. 

The element of a valid contract deals with premium is consideration. 

Answer 2 

The correct option is I. 

Misrepresentation relates to inaccurate statements, which are made without 
any fraudulent intention. 

Answer 3 

The correct option is III. 

Coercion involves pressure applied through criminal means. 

Answer 4 

The correct option is III. 

Life insurance contracts are contracts between two parties (insurer and insured) 
as per requirements of Indian Contract Act, 1872. 

Answer 5 

The correct option is III. 

Bribe is not a valid consideration for a contract.
99 
Answer 6 

The correct option is II. 

Minors are not eligible to contract a life insurance contract. 

Answer 7 

The correct option is III. 

Disclosing known material facts on an insurance proposal form is in tune with 
the principle of “Uberrima Fides”. 

Answer 8 

The correct option is III. 

Friends cannot take out insurance on one another as there is no insurable 
interest present. 

Answer 9 

The correct option is I. 

In case of life insurance insurable interest needs to be present at the time of 
taking out insurance. 

Answer 10 

The correct option is III. 

Falling off the horse is the proximate cause for Ajay‟s death.
100 

SECTION 2 

LIFE SECTION
101 
CHAPTER 6 

WHAT LIFE INSURANCE INVOLVES 

Chapter Introduction 

Insurance involves four aspects 

 An asset 
 The risk insured against 
 The principle of pooling 
 The contract 

Let us now examine the features of life insurance. This chapter will take a brief 
look at the various components of life insurance mentioned above. 

Learning Outcomes 

A. Life insurance business – Components, human life value, mutuality
102 

A. Life insurance business – Components, human life value, mutuality 

1. The Asset – Human Life Value(HLV) 

We have already seen that an asset is a kind of property that yields value or a 
return. For most kinds of property the value is measured in precise monetary 
terms. Similarly the amount of loss of value can also be measured. 

Example 

When a car meets with an accident, the amount of damage can be estimated to 
be Rs. 50,000.The insurer will compensate the owner for this loss. 

How do we estimate the amount of loss when a person dies? 

Is he worth Rs. 50,000 or Rs. 5,00,000? 

The above question has to be answered by an agent whenever he or she meets a 
customer. Based on this the agent can determine how much insurance to 
recommend to the customer. It is in fact the first lesson a life insurance agent 
must learn. 

Luckily we have a measure, developed almost seventy years ago by Prof. 
Hubener. The measure, known as Human Life Value (HLV) is used worldwide. 

The HLV concept considers human life as a kind of property or asset that earns 
an income. It thus measures the value of human life based on an individual‟s 
expected net future earnings. Net earnings means income a person expects to 
earn each year in the future, less the amount he would spend on self. It thus 
indicates the economic loss a family would suffer if the wage earner were to die 
prematurely. These earnings are capitalised, using an appropriate interest rate 
to discount them. 

There is a simple thumb rule or way to measure HLV. This is to divide the 
annual income a family would like to have, even if the bread earner was no 
longer alive, with the rate of interest that can be earned. 

Example 

Mr. Rajan earns Rs. 1,20,000 a year and spends Rs. 24,000 on himself. 

The net earnings his family would lose, were he to die prematurely, would be 
Rs. 96,000 per year. 

Suppose the rate of interest is 8% (expressed as 0.08). 
Human-Life-Value (H.L.V.) = Annual Contribution for Dependents ÷ Rate-
of-Interest.
103 

HLV = 96000 / 0.08 = Rs. 12,00,000 

HLV helps to determine how much insurance one should have for full protection. 
It also tells us the upper limit beyond which life insurance would be speculative. 

In general, we can say that amount of insurance should be around 10 to 15 
times one‟s annual income. In the above example, one should grow suspicious if 
Mr. Rajan was to ask insurance of Rs. 2 crores, while earning only Rs. 1.2 lakhs a 
year. The actual amount of insurance purchased would of course depend on 
factors like how much insurance one can afford and would like to buy. 

2. The Risk 

As we have seen above, life insurance provides protection against those risk 
events that can destroy or diminish the value of human life as an asset. There 
are three kinds of situations where such loss can occur. They are typical 
concerns which ordinary people face. 

Diagram 1: Typical concerns faced by ordinary people 

General insurance on the other hand typically deals with those risks that affect 
property – like fire, loss of cargo while at sea, theft and burglary and motor 
accidents. They also cover events that can result in loss of name and goodwill. 
These are covered by a class of insurance called liability insurance. 

Finally there are risks that can affect the person. Termed as personal risks, 
these may also be covered by general insurance. 

Example 

Accident insurance which protects against losses suffered due to an accident. 

a) How exactly does life insurance differ from general insurance?
104 
General Insurance 
Life Insurance 
Indemnity: 
General 
insurance 
policies, with the exception of 
Personal Accident Insurance, are 
usually contracts of indemnity 
Life insurance policies are contracts 
of assurance. 

Indemnity means that after the 
occurrence of an event like fire, the 
insurer can assess the exact amount 
of loss that has occurred and pays 
compensation only to the amount of 
loss – no more, no less. 

This is not possible in life insurance. 
The amount of benefit to be paid in 
the event of death has to be fixed at 
the beginning itself, at the time of 
writing the contract. Life insurance 
policies are thus often known as life 
assurance contracts. An assured sum 
is 
paid 
to 
the 
nominees 
or 
beneficiaries of the insured when he 
dies. 

Uncertainty: In general insurance 
contracts, the risk event protected 
against is uncertain. No one can 
say with certainty whether a house 
would be gutted by fire or whether 
a car would meet an accident. 
In the case of life insurance, there is 
no question whether the event death 
would occur or not. Death is certain 
once a person is born. What is 
uncertain is the time of death. Life 
insurance thus provides protection 
against the risk of premature death. 

Increase in probability: In general 
insurance, in case of perils like fire 
or earthquake, the probability of 
the happening of the event does 
not increase with time. 
In 
case 
of 
life 
insurance 
the 
probability of death increases with 
age. 

b) Nature of life insurance risk 

Since mortality is related to age it means lower premiums are charged for 
those who are young and higher premiums for older people. One result was 
that individuals who were old but otherwise in good health, tended to 
withdraw while unhealthy members remained in the scheme. Insurance 
companies faced serious problems as a result. They sought to develop 
contracts whose premiums could be afforded and hence paid by individuals 
throughout their life. This led to the development of level premiums.
105 
3. Level premiums 

Important 

The level premium is a premium fixed such that it does not increase with age 
but remains constant throughout the contract period. 

This means that premiums collected in early years would be more than the 
amount needed to cover death claims of those dying at these ages, while 
premiums collected in later years would be less than what is needed to meet 
claims of those dying at the higher ages. The level premium is an average of 
both. This means that the excess premiums of earlier ages compensate for the 
deficit of premiums in later ages. 

The level premium feature is illustrated below. 

Diagram 2: Level Premium 

Level premiums also mean, life insurance contracts are typically long term 
insurance contracts that run for 10, 20 or many more years. On the other hand 
general insurance is typically short term and expires every year. 

Important 

Premiums collected in early years of the contract are held in trust by the 
insurance company for the benefit of its policyholders. The amount so collected 
is called a “Reserve”. An insurance company keeps this reserve to meet the 
future obligations of the insurer. The excess amount also creates a fund known 
as the “Life Fund”. Life insurers invest this fund and earn an interest.
106 
a) Components of level premium 

The level premium has two components. 

i. The first is known as the term or protection component, consisting of 
that portion of premium actually needed to pay the cost of the risk. 

ii. The second is known as the cash value element. It is made up of 
accumulated excess payments of the policyholder. It constitutes the 
savings component. 

This means that almost all life insurance policies contain a mix of protection 
and savings. The more the cash value element in the premium, the more it is 
considered as a savings oriented insurance policy. 

4. The Principle of Risk Pooling 

Life insurance companies have been classified as contractual financial 
institutions. This means that the benefits payable to policyholders have often 
taken the form of contractual guarantees. Life insurance and pensions have 
traditionally been purchased, above all things, for the sense of financial 
security they provide. This security arises as a result of the way the contracts 
are structured and certain safeguards are built to ensure that insurers are in a 
position to pay. The structure arises from the application of the mutuality or 
pooling principle. 

Mutuality is one of the important ways to reduce risk in financial markets, the 
other being diversification. The two are fundamentally different. 

Diversification 
Mutuality 
Under diversification the funds are 
spread out among 
various assets 
(placing the eggs in different baskets). 
Under mutuality or pooling, the funds 
of various individuals are combined 
(placing all eggs in one basket). 
Under diversification we have funds 
flowing from one source to many 
destinations 
Under mutuality we have funds flow 
from many sources to one 

Diagram 3: Mutuality 

Mutuality (Funds flow from many sources to one)
107 

Mutuality or the pooling principle plays two specific kinds of roles in life 
insurance. 

i. The first is its role in providing protection against the economic loss 
arising as a result of one‘s untimely death. This loss is shouldered and 
addressed through having a fund that pools the contributions of many 
who have entered into the life insurance contract. 

ii. The principle of risk pooling however goes beyond mortality risk. It can 
involve the pooling and evening out of financial risk as well. This is 
achieved by pooling the premiums, the funds and consequently the 
attendant risks of various kinds of contracts taken by individuals at 
different points of time. It is thus a case of pooling among different 
generations of policyholders. The outcome of this pooling is to try and 
ensure that in good as well as bad times the life insurer is able to pay a 
uniform rate of return (a uniform bonus) through smoothing out the 
returns across time.
108 
5. The Life Insurance Contract 

Diagram 4: Life insurance contract 

The final aspect of life insurance is the contract. Its significance comes from 
the term sum assured. This amount is contractually guaranteed, making life 
insurance a vehicle of financial security. The element of guarantee also 
implies that life insurance is subject to stringent regulation and strict 
supervision. 

Life insurers are required to maintain statutory reserves as a condition for 
writing the business. They may have stipulations governing investment of their 
funds, they have to ensure that their premiums are adequate and they may be 
subject to rules governing how they can spend policyholders‟ money. 

A key question, often debated is whether the benefits provided to 
policyholders are adequate, compared to other financial instruments. Life 
insurance contracts, we must remember, involve both risk cover and a savings 
element. This makes it a financial product like other products in the financial 
market. Life insurance in fact has been less a protection product and more a 
way of holding wealth. 

It is necessary to make a distinction here between pure term insurance, which 
provides only a death benefit and savings plans which have a large cash value or 
savings component. While the former has a low premium, the latter can be 
quite large and form a significant part of an individual‟s savings. This also 
means that the cash value has a large opportunity cost. The term „opportunity 
cost‟ refers to the cost that one has to bear in terms of opportunities one 
forgoes by not placing one‟s money elsewhere. 

In fact one of the major challenges facing conventional life insurance savings 
contracts came as a result of an argument termed as “Buy Term and invest the 
difference elsewhere”. Essentially it was argued that one would be better off 
buying only term insurance from an insurance company and investing the 
balance premiums in instruments that could yield a high return.
109 
It would be relevant to consider here the arguments that have been advanced 
for and against traditional cash value insurance contracts. 

a) Advantages 

i. 
It has historically proved to be a safe and secure investment. Its cash 
values guarantee a minimum rate of return, which may increase with 
contract duration. 

ii. 
Regularity of premium payments calls for compulsory planning of one‟s 
savings and provides the discipline that savers require. 

iii. Insurer takes care of investment management and frees the individual 
of this responsibility 

iv. It provides liquidity. The insured can take a loan on or surrender the 
policy and thus convert it into cash. 

v. 
Both cash value type life insurance and annuities may enjoy some 
income tax advantages. 

vi. It may be safe from creditors‘ claims, generally in the event of the 
insured‟s bankruptcy or death. 

b) Disadvantages 

i. 
As an instrument with relatively stable returns it is subjected to the 
corroding effect of inflation on all fixed income investments. 

ii. 
The high marketing and other initial costs of life insurance policies, 
reduces the amount of money accumulated in earlier years. 

iii. The yield, while guaranteed, may be less than that on other financial 
market instruments. Lower yield is the result of a trade-off, which also 
reduces the risk. 

Test Yourself 3 

How does diversification reduce risks in financial markets? 

I. Collecting funds from multiple sources and investing them in one place 
II. Investing funds across various asset classes 
III. Maintaining time difference between investments 
IV. Investing in safe assets
110 

Summary 

a) Asset is a kind of property that yields value or a return. 

b) The HLV concept considers human life as a kind of property or asset that 
earns an income. It thus measures the value of human life based on an 
individual‟s expected net future earnings. 

c) The level premium is a premium fixed such that it does not increase with 
age but remains constant throughout the contract period. 

d) Mutuality is one of the important ways to reduce risk in financial markets, 
the other being diversification. 

e) The element of guarantee in a life insurance contract implies that life 
insurance is subject to stringent regulation and strict supervision. 

Key Terms 

1. Asset 
2. Human Life Value 
3. Level premium 
4. Mutuality 
5. Diversification
111 
Answers to Test Yourself 

Answer 1 

The correct answer is II. 

Diversification aims to reduce risks in financial markets by spreading 
investments across various asset classes. 

Self-Examination Questions 

Question 1 

Which of the below is not an element of the life insurance business? 

I. Asset 
II. Risk 
III. Principle of mutuality 
IV. Subsidy 

Question 2 

Who devised the concept of HLV? 

I. Dr. Martin Luther King 
II. Warren Buffet 
III. Prof. Hubener 
IV. George Soros 

Question 3 

Which of the below mentioned insurance plans has the least or no amount of 
savings element? 

I. Term insurance plan 
II. Endowment plan 
III. Whole life plan 
IV. Money back plan 

Question 4 

Which among the following cannot be termed as an asset? 

I. Car 
II. Human Life 
III. Air 
IV. House
112 
Question 5 

Which of the below cannot be categorised under risks? 

I. Dying too young 
II. Dying too early 
III. Natural wear and tear 
IV. Living with disability 

Question 6 

I. Life insurance policies are contracts of indemnity while general insurance 
policies are contracts of assurance 
II. Life insurance policies are contracts of assurance while general insurance 
policies are contracts of indemnity 
III. In case of general insurance the risk event protected against is certain 
IV. The certainty of risk event in case of general insurance increases with time 

Question 7 

Which among the following methods is a traditional method that can help 
determine the insurance needed by an individual? 

I. Human Economic Value 
II. Life Term Proposition 
III. Human Life Value 
IV. Future Life Value 

Question 8 

Which of the below is the most appropriate explanation for the fact that young 
people are charged lesser life insurance premium as compared to old people? 

I. Young people are mostly dependant 
II. Old people can afford to pay more 
III. Mortality is related to age 
IV. Mortality is inversely related to age 

Question 9 

Which of the below is not an advantage of cash value insurance contracts? 

I. Safe and secure investment 
II. Inculcates saving discipline 
III. Lower yields 
IV. Income tax advantages 

Question 10
113 
Which of the below is an advantage of cash value insurance contracts? 

I. Returns subject to corroding effect of inflation 
II. Low accumulation in earlier years 
III. Lower yields 
IV. Secure investment 

Answers to Self-Examination Questions 

Answer 1 

The correct option is IV. 

The elements of life insurance business include asset, risk, principle of 
mutuality and the life insurance contract. 
Subsidy is not an element of life insurance business. 

Answer 2 

The correct option is III. 

Prof. Hubener devised the concept of Human Life Value (HLV). 

Answer 3 

The correct option is I. 

Term insurance does not have a savings element associated with it. 

Answer 4 

The correct option is III. 

Air cannot be termed / categorised as an asset. 

Answer 5 

The correct option is III. 

Natural wear and tear is a phenomenon and not a risk. 

Answer 6 

The correct option is II. 

Life insurance policies are contracts of assurance while general insurance 
policies are contracts of indemnity.
114 

Answer 7 

The correct option is III. 

Human Life Value is a method to calculate the amount of insurance needed by 
an individual. 

Answer 8 

The correct option is III. 

Mortality is related to age and hence young people who are less likely to die are 
charged lower premiums as compared to old people. 

Answer 9 

The correct option is III. 

Lower yield is one of the disadvantages of cash value insurance contracts. 

Answer 10 

The correct option is IV. 

Secure investment is one of the advantages of cash value insurance contracts.
115 

CHAPTER 7 

FINANCIAL PLANNING 
Chapter Introduction 

In previous chapters we discussed what life insurance involves and its role in 
providing financial protection. Security is but one of the concerns of individuals 
who seek to allocate their income and wealth to meet various needs of the 
present and the future. Life insurance must thus be understood in the wider 
context of “Personal Financial Planning”. The purpose of this chapter is to 
introduce the subject of financial planning. 

Learning Outcomes 

A. Financial planning and the individual life cycle 
B. Role of financial planning 
C. Financial planning - Types
116 

A. Financial planning and the individual life cycle 

1. What is financial planning? 

Most of us spend a major part of our lives working to make money. Isn‟t it time 
we began to consider that money can be put to work for us? Financial planning 
is a smart way to achieve this objective. Let us examine some definitions: 

Definition 

i. Financial planning is a process of identifying one‟s life‟s goals, translating 
these identified goals into financial goals and managing one‟s finances in 
ways that will help one to achieve those goals. 

ii. Financial planning is a process through which one can chart a roadmap to 
meet expected and unforeseen needs in one‟s life. It involves assessing 
one‟s net worth, estimating future financial needs, and working towards 
meeting those needs through proper management of finances. 

iii. Financial planning is taking action to turn one‟s goals and desires into 
reality. 

iv. Financial planning takes into account one‟s current and future needs, one‟s 
individual risk profile and one‟s income to chart out a roadmap to meet 
these anticipated needs. 

Financial planning plays a crucial role in building a life with less worry. Careful 
planning can help you set your priorities and work steadily to achieve your 
various goals. 

Diagram 1: Types of Goals 

i. These goals may be short term: Buying an LCD TV set or a family 
vacation
117 
ii. They could be medium term: Buying a house or a vacation abroad 
iii. The long term goals may include: Education or marriage of one‟s child or 
post retirement provision 

2. Individual‘s life cycle 

It was William Shakespeare who said that the world was a stage. From the day a 
person is born till the day of his / her death, he / she goes through various 
stages in life, during which he / she is expected to play a series of roles – as 
learner, earner, partner, parent, as provider, as empty nester and the final 
retirement years. 

These stages are illustrated in the diagram given below. 

Diagram 2: The Economic Life Cycle 

Life Stages and Priorities 

a) Learner (till say age 20 -25) : a stage when one is preparing to be a 
productive citizen through enhancing his or her knowledge and skills. 
Focus is on raising value of one‟s human capital. Funds are required for 
financing one‟s education , For instance, meeting the high cost of fees 
for an MBA in a prestiegus management institution. 

b) Earner (from 25 onwards): the stage when one has found employment 
and perhaps earns enough to meet his or her needs and has some surplus 
to spare. The individual at this stage may have family responsibilities 
and may also engage in safvings and investment towards asset creation 
with a view to meet the needs that may arise in the immediate future. 
For instance, a young man in a Multinational job takes a housing loan and 
invests in a house. 

c) Partner (on getting marriage at say 28 - 30): this is the stage when 
one has got married and now has a family of one‟s own. This stage 
brings into immediate focus a host of concerns associated with building a
118 
family and the liabilities that come in its wake – like having a house of 
one‟s own, perhaps a car, consumer durables, planning for children‟s 
future etc. 

d) Parent (say 28 to 35): these are the years when one has become the 
proud parent of one or more children. These are typcal; years when one 
has to worry about their health and education - getting them into good 
schools etc.